
Causal AI
Robert Osazuwa Ness
Foreword by Lindsay Edwards
To comment go to livebook.
Manning
Shelter Island
For more information on this and other Manning titles go to
manning.com.

copyright
For online information and ordering of this and
other Manning books, please visit
www.manning.com. The publisher offers
discounts on this book when ordered in quantity.
For more information, please contact
  Special Sales Department
  Manning Publications Co.
  20 Baldwin Road        
  PO Box 761
  Shelter Island, NY 11964 
  Email: orders@manning.com
©2025 by Manning Publications Co. All rights
reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in
any form or by means electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, or otherwise, without prior written
permission of the publisher.

Many of the designations used by manufacturers
and sellers to distinguish their products are
claimed as trademarks. Where those
designations appear in the book, and Manning
Publications was aware of a trademark claim, the
designations have been printed in initial caps or
all caps.
Recognizing the importance of preserving what
has been written, it is Manning’s policy to have
the books we publish printed on acid-free paper,
and we exert our best efforts to that end.
Recognizing also our responsibility to conserve
the resources of our planet, Manning books are
printed on paper that is at least 15 percent
recycled and processed without the use of
elemental chlorine.
The author and publisher have made every effort
to ensure that the information in this book was
correct at press time. The author and publisher
do not assume and hereby disclaim any liability
to any party for any loss, damage, or disruption
caused by errors or omissions, whether such
errors or omissions result from negligence,
accident, or any other cause, or from any usage
of the information herein.
Manning Publications Co.
20 Baldwin Road
PO Box 761
Shelter Island, NY 11964
Development editor: Frances Lefkowitz
Technical editor: Emily McMilin
Review editor: Dunja Nikitović

Production editor: Kathy Rossland
Copy editor: Andy Carroll
Proofreader: Jason Everett
Technical proofreader: Jeffrey Finkelstein
Typesetter and cover designer: Marija Tudor
ISBN 9781633439917
Printed in the United States of America

dedication
To Dad, Professor Ness

contents
foreword
preface
acknowledgments
about this book
about the author
about the cover illustration
Part 1 Conceptual foundations
1 Why causal AI
1.1 What is causal AI?
1.2 How this book approaches causal inference
1.2.1 Emphasis on AI
1.2.2 Focus on tech, retail, and business
1.2.3 Parallel world counterfactuals and other queries beyond causal
effects
1.2.4 An assumption of commodification of inference
1.2.5 Breaking down theory with code
1.3 Causality’s role in modern AI workflows
1.3.1 Better data science
1.3.2 Better attribution, credit assignment, and root cause analysis
1.3.3 More robust, decomposable, and explainable models
1.3.4 Fairer AI

1.4 How causality is driving the next AI wave
1.4.1 Causal representation learning
1.4.2 Causal reinforcement learning
1.4.3 Large language models and foundation models
1.5 A machine learning-themed primer on causality
1.5.1 Queries, probabilities, and statistics
1.5.2 Causality and MNIST
1.5.3 Causal queries, probabilities, and statistics
2 A primer on probabilistic generative modeling
2.1 Primer on probability
2.1.1 Random variables and probability
2.1.2 Probability distributions and distribution functions
2.1.3 Joint probability and conditional probability
2.1.4 The chain rule, the law of total probability, and Bayes Rule
2.1.5 Markovian assumptions and Markov kernels
2.1.6 Parameters
2.1.7 Canonical classes of probability distribution
2.1.8 Visualizing distributions
2.1.9 Independence and conditional independence
2.1.10 Expected value
2.2 Computational probability
2.2.1 The physical interpretation of probability
2.2.2 Random generation
2.2.3 Coding random processes
2.2.4 Monte Carlo simulation and expectation
2.2.5 Programming probabilistic inference

2.3 Data, populations, statistics, and models
2.3.1 Probability distributions as models for populations
2.3.2 From the observed data to the data generating process
2.3.3 Statistical tests for independence
2.3.4 Statistical estimation of model parameters
2.4 Determinism and subjective probability
2.4.1 Determinism
2.4.2 Subjective probability
Part 2 Building and validating a causal graph
3 Building a causal graphical model
3.1 Introducing the causal DAG
3.1.1 Case study: A causal model for transportation
3.1.2 Why use a causal DAG?
3.1.3 DAGs are useful in communicating and visualizing causal
assumptions
3.1.4 We have many tools for computing over DAGs
3.1.5 Causal DAGs can represent time
3.1.6 DAGs link causality to conditional independence
3.1.7 DAGs can provide scaffolding for probabilistic ML models
3.1.8 Training a model on the causal DAG
3.1.9 Different techniques for parameter learning
3.1.10 Learning parameters when there are latent variables
3.1.11 Inference with a trained causal probabilistic machine learning
model
3.2 Causal invariance and parameter modularity
3.2.1 Independence of mechanism and parameter modularity

3.2.2 Causal transfer learning, data fusion, and invariant prediction
3.2.3 Fitting parameters with common sense
3.3 Your causal question scopes the DAG
3.3.1 Selecting variables for inclusion in the DAG
3.3.2 Including variables in causal DAGs by their role in inference
3.4 Looking ahead: Model testing and combining causal graphs with deep
learning
4 Testing the DAG with causal constraints
4.1 How causality induces conditional independence
4.1.1 Colliders
4.1.2 Abstracting independence with a causal graph
4.2 D-separation and conditional independence
4.2.1 D-separation: A gateway to simplified causal analysis
4.2.2 Examples of d-separating multiple paths
4.2.3 D-separation in code
4.3 Refuting a causal DAG
4.3.1 Revisiting the causal Markov property
4.3.2 Refutation using conditional independence tests
4.3.3 Some tests are more important than others
4.4 Caveats with conditional independence testing
4.4.1 Statistical tests always have some chance of error
4.4.2 Testing causal DAGs with traditional CI tests is flawed
4.4.3 p-values vary with the size of the data
4.4.4 The problem of multiple comparisons
4.4.5 Conditional independence testing struggles in machine learning
settings
4.4.6 Final thoughts

4.5 Refuting a causal DAG given latent variables
4.5.1 An example of a testable implication that works with latent
variables
4.5.2 Libraries and perspectives on testing functional constraints
4.5.3 Testing a functional constraint
4.5.4 Final thoughts on testable implications
4.6 Primer on (the perils of) causal discovery
4.6.1 Approaches to causal discovery
4.6.2 Causal discovery, causal faithfulness, and latent variable
assumptions
4.6.3 Equivalence classes and PDAGs
4.6.4 How to think about causal discovery
5 Connecting causality and deep learning
5.1 A causal model of a computer vision problem
5.1.1 Leveraging the universal function approximator
5.1.2 Causal abstraction and plate models
5.2 Training a neural causal model
5.2.1 Setting up the training data
5.2.2 Setting up the variational autoencoder
5.2.3 The training procedure
5.2.4 Evaluating training
5.2.5 How should we causally interpret Z?
5.2.6 Advantages of this causal interpretation
5.3 Using causal inference to enhance deep learning
5.3.1 Independence of mechanism as an inductive bias
5.3.2 Case study: Semi-supervised learning
5.3.3 Demystifying deep learning with causality

Part 3 The causal hierarchy
6 Structural causal models
6.1 From a general causal graphical model to an SCM
6.1.1 Forensics case study
6.1.2 Converting to an SCM via reparameterization
6.1.3 Formalizing the new model
6.1.4 A discrete, imperative example of an SCM
6.1.5 Why use SCMs?
6.1.6 Differences from related approaches
6.1.7 Causal determinism and implications to how we model
6.2 Equivalence between SCMs
6.2.1 Reparameterization is not enough
6.2.2 Uniqueness and equivalence of SCMs
6.3 Implementing SCMs for rule-based systems
6.3.1 Case study: The Monty Hall problem
6.3.2 A causal DAG for the Monty Hall problem
6.3.3 Implementing Monty Hall as an SCM with pgmpy
6.3.4 Exogenous variables in the rule-based system
6.3.5 Applications of SCM-modeling of rule-based systems
6.4 Training an SCM on data
6.4.1 What assignment functions should I choose?
6.4.2 How should I model the exogenous variable distributions?
6.4.3 Additive models: A popular choice for SCM modeling
6.4.4 Linear Gaussian additive model
6.4.5 Linear non-Gaussian additive models

6.4.6 Nonlinear additive noise models
6.4.7 Training additive model SCMs with regression tools
6.4.8 Beyond the additive model
6.5 Combining SCMs with deep learning
6.5.1 Implementing and training an SCM with basic PyTorch
6.5.2 Training an SCM with probabilistic PyTorch
6.5.3 Neural SCMs and normalizing flows
7 Interventions and causal effects
7.1 Case studies of interventions
7.1.1 Case study: Predicting the weather vs. business performance
7.1.2 Case study: Credit fraud detection
7.1.3 Case study: Statistical analysis for an online role-playing game
7.1.4 From randomized experiments to interventions
7.1.5 From observations to experiments
7.1.6 From experiments to interventions
7.1.7 Recap
7.2 The ideal intervention and intervention operator
7.2.1 Intervention operators
7.2.2 Ideal interventions in structural causal models
7.2.3 Graph surgery: The ideal intervention in causal DAGs and causal
graphical models
7.2.4 Graph surgery and d-separation
7.2.5 Ideal interventions and causal Markov kernels
7.2.6 Ideal interventions in a causal program
7.3 Intervention variables and distributions
7.3.1 “Do” and counterfactual notation

7.3.2 When causal notation reduces to traditional notation
7.3.3 Causal models represent all intervention distributions
7.4 Interventions and causal effects
7.4.1 Average treatment effects with binary causes
7.4.2 Average treatment effect with categorical causes
7.4.3 Average treatment effect for continuous causes
7.4.4 Conditional average treatment effect
7.4.5 Statistical measures of association and causality
7.4.6 Causality and regression models
7.5 Stochastic interventions
7.5.1 Random assignment in an experiment is a stochastic intervention
7.5.2 Intervention policies
7.6 Practical considerations in modeling interventions
7.6.1 Reasoning about interventions that we can’t do in reality
7.6.2 Refutation and real-world interventions
7.6.3 “No causation without manipulation”
7.6.4 Modeling “non-ideal” interventions
8 Counterfactuals and parallel worlds
8.1 Motivating counterfactual reasoning
8.1.1 Online gaming
8.1.2 The streaming wars
8.1.3 Counterfactuals analysis of machine learning models
8.1.4 Regret and why do we care about what “would have happened?”
8.1.5 Reinforcement learning and automated decision-making
8.1.6 Steps to answering a counterfactual query
8.2 Symbolic representation of counterfactuals

8.2.1 Hypothetical statements and questions
8.2.2 Facts filter hypotheticals to a subpopulation
8.2.3 Conditional hypotheticals, interventions, and simulation
8.2.4 Counterfactual statements
8.2.5 The consistency rule
8.2.6 More examples
8.3 Binary counterfactuals
8.3.1 Probabilities of causation
8.3.2 Probabilities of causation and attribution
8.3.3 Binary counterfactuals and uplift modeling
8.4 Possible worlds and parallel world graphs
8.4.1 Potential outcomes in possible worlds
8.4.2 The parallel world graph
8.4.3 Applying the hypothetical condition via graph surgery
8.4.4 Reasoning across more than two possible worlds
8.4.5 Rule of thumb: Hypothetical worlds should be simpler
9 The general counterfactual inference algorithm
9.1 Algorithm walkthrough
9.1.1 Abduction: Infer the exogenous variables given the observed
endogenous variables
9.1.2 Action: Implementing the hypothetical causes
9.1.3 Prediction: Inferring hypothetical outcomes
9.1.4 Counterfactual Monte Carlo
9.1.5 Introduction to the case studies
9.2 Case study 1: Monty Hall problem
9.2.1 Specifying the exogenous variables

9.2.2 Specifying the assignment functions for the endogenous variables
9.2.3 Building the parallel world graphical model
9.2.4 Running the counterfactual inference algorithm
9.3 Case study 2: Counterfactual variational inference
9.3.1 Building the model
9.3.2 Implementing an intervention with pyro.do
9.3.3 Implementing the abduction step with variational inference
9.3.4 Implementing the action and prediction steps
9.4 Case study 3: Counterfactual image generation with a deep generative
model
9.4.1 The dSprites data
9.4.2 Assumptions needed for counterfactual image generation
10 Identification and the causal hierarchy
10.1 The causal hierarchy
10.1.1 Where questions and queries fall on the hierarchy
10.1.2 Where models and assumptions fall on the hierarchy
10.1.3 Where data falls on the hierarchy
10.1.4 The causal hierarchy theorem
10.2 Identification and the causal inference workflow
10.2.1 Defining identification
10.2.2 The causal inference workflow
10.2.3 Separating identification and estimation
10.3 Identification with backdoor adjustment
10.3.1 The backdoor adjustment formula
10.3.2 Demystifying the back door
10.4 Graphical identification with the do-calculus

10.4.1 Demystifying the do-calculus
10.4.2 Using the do-calculus for backdoor identification
10.5 Graphical identification algorithms
10.5.1 Case study: The front-door estimand
10.5.2 Demystifying the front door
10.6 General counterfactual identification
10.6.1 The problem with the general algorithm for counterfactual
inference
10.6.2 Example: Monotonicity and the probabilities of causation
10.7 Graphical counterfactual identification
10.7.1 Effect of treatment on the treated
10.7.2 Identification over the counterfactual graph
10.7.3 Counterfactual identification with single-world intervention
graphs
10.7.4 Identification with SWIGs
10.7.5 The single-world assumption
10.8 Identification and probabilistic inference
10.9 Partial identification
Part 4 Applications of causal inference
11 Building a causal inference workflow
11.1 Step 1: Select the query
11.2 Step 2: Build the model
11.3 Step 3: Identify the estimand
11.3.1 The backdoor adjustment estimand
11.3.2 The instrumental variable estimand
11.3.3 The front-door adjustment estimand

11.3.4 Choosing estimands and reducing “DAG anxiety”
11.3.5 When you don’t have identification
11.4 Step 4: Estimate the estimand
11.4.1 Linear regression estimation of the backdoor estimand
11.4.2 Propensity score estimators of the backdoor estimand
11.4.3 Backdoor estimation with machine learning
11.4.4 Front-door estimation
11.4.5 Instrumental variable methods
11.4.6 Comparing and selecting estimators
11.5 Step 5: Refutation
11.5.1 Data size reduction
11.5.2 Adding a dummy confounder
11.5.3 Replacing treatment with a dummy
11.5.4 Replacing outcome with a dummy outcome
11.5.5 Testing robustness to unmodeled confounders
11.6 Causal inference with causal generative models
11.6.1 Transformations for causal inference
11.6.2 Steps for inferring a causal query with a causal generative model
11.6.3 Extending inference to estimation
11.6.4 A VAE-inspired model for causal inference
11.6.5 Setting up posterior inference with SVI
11.6.6 Posterior predictive inference of the ATE
11.6.7 On the identifiability of the Bayesian causal generative inference
11.6.8 Closing thoughts on causal latent variable models
12 Causal decisions and reinforcement learning
12.1 A causal primer on decision theory

12.1.1 Utility, reward, loss, and cost
12.1.2 Uncertainty comes from other causes
12.2 Causal decision theory
12.2.1 Decisions as a level 2 query
12.2.2 Causal characterization of decision rules and policies
12.2.3 Causal probabilistic decision-modeling and admissibility
12.2.4 The deceptive alignment of argmax values of causal and non-
causal expectations
12.2.5 Newcomb’s paradox
12.2.6 Newcomb’s paradox with a causal model
12.2.7 Introspection in causal decision theory
12.3 Causal DAGs and sequential decisions
12.3.1 Bandit feedback
12.3.2 Contextual bandit feedback
12.3.3 Delayed feedback
12.3.4 Causal queries on a sequential model
12.4 Policies as stochastic interventions
12.4.1 Examples in sequential decision-making
12.4.2 How policies can introduce confounding
12.5 Causal reinforcement learning
12.5.1 Connecting causality and Markov decision processes
12.5.2 The MDP as a causal DAG
12.5.3 Partially observable MDPs
12.5.4 Policy in an MDP
12.5.5 Causal Bellman equation
12.6 Counterfactual reasoning for decision-theory
12.6.1 Counterfactual policy evaluation

12.6.2 Counterfactual regret minimization
12.6.3 Making level 3 assumptions in decision problems
13 Causality and large language models
13.1 LLMs as a causal knowledgebase
13.1.1 Building a causal DAG
13.1.2 Generating code for DAGs, models, and causal analyses
13.1.3 Explanations and mechanism
13.1.4 The causal frame problem and AI alignment
13.1.5 Understanding and contextualizing causal concepts
13.1.6 Formalization of causal queries
13.1.7 Beware: LLMs hallucinate
13.2 A causality-themed LLM primer
13.2.1 A probabilistic ML view of LLMs
13.2.2 The attention mechanism
13.2.3 From tokens to causal representation
13.2.4 Hallucination, attention, and causal identification
13.3 Forging your own causal LLM
13.3.1 An LLM for script writing
13.3.2 Using pretrained models for causal Markov kernels
13.3.3 Sampling from the interventional and observational distributions
13.3.4 Closing thoughts
index

foreword
Twenty-seven lawyers in the room, anybody know ‘post
hoc, ergo propter hoc?’
—President Josiah Bartlett ( The West Wing)
“Post hoc ergo propter hoc” is a logical fallacy regarding
causation: “After it, therefore because of it.” The idea dates
back at least to Aristotle (the fallacy appears in On
Sophistical Refutations). More than two thousand years after
Aristotle, Welsh economic theorist Sir Clive Granger inverted
“post hoc ergo propter hoc” to provide one of the two
principles underlying what is now known as Granger
Causality, namely that something cannot cause something if
it happened before it.
Humans have been fascinated by the notion of causality—
what causes what—since their early recorded writing.
Indeed, causal reasoning is a major distinguishing feature of
human cognition. On a practical level, the importance is
obvious: one cannot control something if one does not
understand cause and effect. Causal AI is the first book I
know of that draws together the necessary theory, the
technical foundations (i.e., the packages and libraries), and
a host of real examples, to allow anyone with a decent
grounding in basic probability theory and software
engineering to get started using causal AI to tackle any
problem they choose.
In my own field—the application of machine learning to
problems in biology and drug discovery—understanding
causality is essential. New drugs currently cost $2–3B to
develop, with most of this cost coming from the 95% failure

rate of new drugs in clinical trials. A significant proportion of
these costs can be explained by failures to understand
(particularly biological) causality. Approximately 60% of all
drug failures can be traced back to a poor selection of drug
target, and many of these poor drug targets are errors of
causal attribution.
While machine learning and artificial intelligence are rapidly
transforming our world, they are dogged by a number of
technical problems, including poor explainability,
robustness, and generalizability. Causal reasoning addresses
all of these directly. Often, one will hear AI algorithms being
described as “black boxes” (in other words, impossible to
“peer into” and explain). Yet, intuitively (and increasingly
backed up by research), machine learning models that are
robustly predictive must have learned causality.
Models that learn causality explicitly (such as the methods
outlined in this book) will be both predictive and
explainable. Models regularly fail to generalize when a
correlate of the true cause is used to predict an effect (or
output). Let us assume a chain of events: A causes B causes
C. If a model, trained on this data, has learned to predict A
from C, it is inherently fragile. It will fail completely if, in a
new setting, the link between A and B is somehow broken.
Again, explicit causal models tackle this issue directly,
greatly increasing the chances that a performant model will
generalize well.
In this excellent book, Robert Ness uses vignettes drawn
from business, retail, and technology. While these are
perfect teaching tools, readers should be under no illusion:
The scope for these methods is vast and important,
including medicine, biology, and policy-making.
Understanding and modeling causality has extraordinary
potential to improve human lives. Yet, as Robert points out,

much of the knowledge required to understand and apply
causal AI effectively is distributed across disciplines,
including traditional statistics, Bayesian inference, computer
science, and probabilistic machine learning. Hence, learning
about and applying causal AI has (till now) been far more
arduous than it should be.
Robert is also an inspired teacher—all the better, as this
stuff can be hard! I hope you enjoy Causal AI as much as I
did. It is essential reading for anyone interested in applying
these powerful methods (cause) and, hopefully, having a
positive impact in the world (effect).
—Lindsay Edwards CTO at Relation, London

preface
I wrote this book because I wanted a code-first approach to
causal inference that seamlessly fit with modern deep
learning. It didn’t make sense to me that deep learning was
often presented as being at odds with causal reasoning and
inference, so I wanted to write a book that proved they
combine well to their mutual benefit.
Second, I wanted to close an obvious gap. Deep generative
machine learning methods and graphical causal inference
have a common ancestor in probabilistic graphical models.
There have been tremendous advances in generative
machine learning in recent years, including in the ability to
synthetize realistic text, images, and video. Yet, in my view,
the low-hanging fruit of connections to related concepts in
graphical causality was left to rot on the vine. Chances are
that if you’re reading this, you sensed this gap as well. So
here we are.
This book evolved from the Causal AI workshop I run
through Altdeep.ai, an educational company that runs
workshops and community events devoted to advanced
topics in modeling. Participants in this causal AI workshop
have included data scientists, machine learning engineers,
and product managers from Google, Amazon, Meta, and
other big tech companies. They’ve also included data
scientists and ML experts from retailers such as Nike,
consultancies like Deloitte, and pharmaceuticals like
AstraZeneca. We’ve worked with quantitative marketing
experts trying to take causal approaches to channel
attribution. We’ve worked with economists and molecular
biologists trying to get a more general perspective on the
causal methods popular in their domains. We’ve worked

with professors, post-docs, and PhD students across
departments looking for a code-first approach to learning
causal inference.
I wrote this book for all of these people, based on the real-
world problems they care about and their feedback. If you
belong to or relate to any of these groups, this book is for
you, too.
How is this book different from other causal inference
books? Causal inference relies mainly on three different skill
sets: the ability to turn your domain knowledge into a causal
model rendered in code, deep skills in probability theory,
and deep skills in statistical theory and methods. This book
focuses on the first skill by using libraries that enable
bespoke causal modeling, and by leveraging the deep
learning machinery in tools such as PyTorch to do the
statistical heavy lifting.
I hope this sounds like what you are looking for.

acknowledgments
I was very fortunate to have Emily McMilin, senior research
scientist at Meta, and Kevin Murphy, principal research
scientist at Google AI and author of the best book on
probabilistic ML, both give a careful review of each chapter.
Finally, Jeffrey Finkelstein, the most talented research
engineer I’ve ever met, provided a thorough code review.
My colleagues at Microsoft Research, Emre Kiciman and
Amit Sharma, provided helpful advice with the DoWhy code.
Fritz Obermeyer and Eli Bingham got me unstuck on Pyro
code. The book also builds on work with many collaborators,
including Karen Sachs, Sara Taheri, Olga Vitek, and Jeremy
Zucker.
My editors Frances Lefkowitz, Michael Stephens, and Andy
Carroll at Manning Publications provided frequent and
invaluable edits and feedback, as did many others on the
Manning team.
To all the reviewers—Adi Shavit, Alain Couniot, Camilla
Montonen, Carlos Aya-Moreno, Christian Sutton, Clemens
Baader, German Vidal, Guillermo Alcántara González, Igor
Vieira, Jeremy Loscheider, Jesús Juárez, Jose San Leandro,
Keith Kim, Kyle Peterson, Maria Ana, Mikael Dautrey, Nick
Decroos, Pierluigi Riti, Pietro Alberto Rossi, Sebastian Maier,
Sergio Govoni, Simone Sguazza, and Thomas Joseph Heiman
—your suggestions helped make this a better book.

about this book
This book is for
Machine learning engineers looking to incorporate
causality into AI systems and build more robust
predictive models
Data scientists who are looking to expand both their
causal inference and machine learning skillsets
Researchers who want a wholistic view of causal
inference and how it connects to their domain of
expertise without going down stats theory rabbit holes
AI product experts looking for case studies in business
settings, especially tech and retail
People who want to get in on the ground floor of causal
AI
What is the required mathematical
and programming background?
Rest assured, this book doesn’t require a deep background
in probability and statistics theory. The relationship between
causality and statistics is like the relationship between
engineering and math. Engineering involves a lot of math,
but you need only a bit of math to learn core engineering
concepts. After learning those concepts and digging into an
applied problem, you can focus on learning the extra math
you need to go deep on that problem.
This book assumes a level of familiarity with probability and
statistics typical of a data scientist. Specifically, it assumes
you have basic knowledge of

Probability distributions
Joint probability and conditional probability and how
they relate to each other (chain rule, Bayes rule)
What it means to draw samples from a distribution
Expectation, 
independence, 
and 
conditional
independence
Statistical ideas such as random samples, identically
and independently sampled data, and statistical bias
Chapter 2 provides a primer on these and other topics key
to the ideas presented in this book for those who need
refreshing.
What programming tools will we use?
This book assumes you are familiar with data science
scripting in Python. The three open source Python libraries
we rely on in this book are DoWhy, pgmpy, and Pyro. DoWhy
is a library for the open source PyWhy suite of Python
libraries for causal inference. pgmpy is a probabilistic
graphical modeling library built on SciPy and NetworkX. Pyro
is a probabilistic machine learning library that extends
PyTorch.
Our code-first goal is unique because, rather than going
deep into the statistical theory needed to do causal
inference, we rely on these supporting libraries to do the
statistics for us. DoWhy tries to be as end-to-end as possible
in terms of mapping domain knowledge inputs to causal
inference outputs. When we want to do more bespoke
modeling, we’ll use pgmpy or Pyro. These libraries provide
probabilistic inference algorithms that take care of the
estimation theory. pgmpy has graph-based inference
algorithms that are extremely reliable. Pyro, as an extension
of PyTorch, extends causal modeling to deep generative

models on high dimensional data and variational inference—
a cutting-edge deep learning–based inference technique.
If your background is in R or Julia, you should still find this
book useful. There are numerous R and Julia packages that
overlap in functionality with DoWhy. Graphical modeling
software in these languages, such as bnlearn, can substitute
for pgmpy. Similarly, the ideas we develop with Pyro will
work with similar probabilistic programming languages, such
as PyMC. See https://altdeep.ai/p/causalaibook for links to
code notebooks related to the book.
Navigating this book
This book is divided into four parts. In part 1, we’ll establish
the conceptual foundations for the models we’ll build in this
book.
Chapter 1 illustrates our probabilistic machine learning
approach to causality with some practical examples. We’ll
then dive right into a causal inference workflow using the
MNIST data—the “hello world” of machine learning.
Throughout the rest of the book, we’ll do code-first
explorations of various parts of this workflow.
Chapter 2 provides a primer on the core concepts from
probabilistic modeling, generative machine learning, and
Bayesian modeling that we’ll build upon in this book. We’ll
also explore key ideas from statistical inference, such as
conditional independence and Monte Carlo, which we’ll
leverage to build, validate, and do inference with causal
models.
In part 2, you’ll learn to build and validate causal graphs,
including deep causal generative models.

Chapter 3 starts by giving you a solid foundation for the
causal directed acyclic graph (DAG) as a model of the causal
structure of a data generating process. We’ll begin with a
practical example of building a causal graph based on
domain knowledge and train a causal graphical model on
the structure of that causal graph. I’ll also introduce
parameter modularity and independence of mechanism—
ideas that make a causal graphical model special, relative to
other types of probabilistic graphical models.
Chapter 4 dives into performing empirical validation of a
causal DAG. The true causal DAG constrains the statistical
structure of the data. I’ll show how to articulate those
constraints, and how to use them to design statistical tests
that evaluate how well our proposed DAG stands up against
empirical evidence in the data. We’ll also look at how causal
discovery algorithms automate this process, and you’ll learn
how to avoid the pitfalls of these algorithms.
Chapter 5 explores the connection between deep learning
and causal inference. First, we’ll use deep learning to build a
more powerful causal graphical model using a causal DAG
as a scaffold. Then we’ll explore ways in which causality can
improve the traditional deep learning workflow. We’ll use
semi-supervised learning as a case study.
In part 3, we’ll take a code-first dive into the conceptual
heart of causal inference, namely structural causal models,
interventions, counterfactual inference, and causal
identification.
Chapter 6 introduces the structural causal model. Though
often regarded as a difficult approach to causal inference, I’ll
show that it is a simple kind of generative model and thus
easy to implement with generative modeling tools like Pyro.

We’ll see how to implement these models with deep
learning frameworks.
Chapter 7 introduces the concept of interventions, meaning
actions that change the data generating process. Using our
code-first approach and Pyro’s do function, we’ll ground the
idea of interventions in generative modeling to show how
causal models can emulate real-world interventions.
Generative modeling of interventions will become the
keystone of our causal inference methods going forward.
Chapter 8 introduces parallel-world counterfactual
reasoning. Once we observe a causal event and its effect,
counterfactual reasoning asks how the effect might have
been different if the cause had been different. We’ll see how
to model this idea by building a causal DAG that crosses
parallel worlds. We’ll look at practical examples of
counterfactual reasoning, such as in marketing and in deal-
making at Netflix.
Chapter 9 introduces the algorithm for general
counterfactual inference. The algorithm combines a
structural causal model with the parallel-world approach we
saw in chapter 8. We’ll look at several examples of how to
implement this approach, including using a deep learning
image model in PyTorch.
Chapter 10 provides a guide to causal identification, which
concerns how we make causal inferences from data. While
this is typically a theory-dense topic, we’ll take a code-first
approach. For example, we’ll introduce the concept of the
do-calculus with a Python library whose algorithms apply
the do-calculus automatically.
In part 4, we’ll take a deeper look at applications.

Chapter 11 dives into building a causal effect estimation
workflow. We’ll work with the DoWhy library and explore
different statistical algorithms for identifying, estimating,
and then stress-testing a causal effect estimate. We’ll cover
traditional techniques, such as propensity scores and
instrumental variables, as well as newer methods, such as
double machine learning. We’ll then use Pyro to implement
a Bayesian approach to estimating a causal effect using a
Monte Carlo simulation of interventions on a deep causal
graphical model trained with latent variables.
Chapter 12 explores the connection of causality with
automated decision-making and reinforcement learning.
We’ll start with a famous causal decision problem called
Newcomb’s paradox and then extend to bandits, Markov
decision processes, partial Markov decision processes, and
reinforcement learning. We’ll connect interventions to
reward functions, show how agents make decisions under
confounding, and see how policies are intervention
generators.
Finally, chapter 13 introduces causality in the context of
large language models and other multimodal foundation
models. First, we’ll explore how to use a large language
model to solve causal problems. We’ll then explore how to
chain large language models over a causal DAG, and use
causal interventions to generate text from these models, as
well as the benefits of doing so.
About the code
In each chapter, I provide a list of the Python libraries and
versions you’ll need to get the code working as well as
guidance in setting up your environment. Note that different
versions of the same library are sometimes used in different

chapters. All the code in the book is implemented in Jupyter
notebooks that are available online at
https://altdeep.ai/p/causalaibook. The notebooks were all
tested in Google Colab, and they include links that
automatically load the notebooks in Google Colab, where
you can run them directly. This can save time and
aggravation if you hit issues in setting up your environment.
You’ll find links to the notebooks and other book resources
at https://altdeep.ai/p/causalaibook.
This book contains many examples of source code, both in
numbered listings and in-line with normal text. In both
cases, source code is formatted in a fixed-width font like
this to separate it from ordinary text.
In many cases, the original source code has been
reformatted; I’ve added line breaks and reworked
indentation to accommodate the available page space in
the book. In rare cases, even this was not enough, and
listings include line-continuation markers (↪). Additionally,
comments in the source code have often been removed
from the listings when the code is described in the text.
Code annotations accompany many of the listings,
highlighting important concepts.
You can get executable snippets of code from the liveBook
(online) version of this book at
https://livebook.manning.com/book/causal-ai. The complete
code for the examples in the book is available for download
from the Manning website at
https://www.manning.com/books/causal-ai and from
https://altdeep.ai/p/causalaibook.

liveBook discussion forum
Purchase of Causal AI includes free access to liveBook,
Manning’s online reading platform. Using liveBook’s
exclusive discussion features, you can attach comments to
the book globally or to specific sections or paragraphs. It’s a
snap to make notes for yourself, ask and answer technical
questions, and receive help from the author and other
users. To access the forum, go to
https://livebook.manning.com/book/causal-ai/discussion. You
can also learn more about Manning’s forums and the rules
of conduct at https://livebook.manning.com/discussion.
Manning’s commitment to our readers is to provide a venue
where a meaningful dialogue between individual readers
and between readers and the author can take place. It is not
a commitment to any specific amount of participation on the
part of the author, whose contribution to the forum remains
voluntary (and unpaid). We suggest you try asking the
author some challenging questions lest his interest stray!
The forum and the archives of previous discussions will be
accessible from the publisher’s website as long as the book
is in print.

about the author
Robert Osazuwa Ness researches generative AI at
Microsoft Research. He is an adjunct professor in the Khoury
School of Information Sciences at Northeastern University.
He studied at Johns Hopkins University and Purdue
University. He has a PhD in statistics.

about the cover
illustration
The figure on the cover of Causal AI, titled “La Religieuse,”
or “The Nun,” is taken from a book by Louis Curmer
published in 1841. Each illustration is finely drawn and
colored by hand.
In those days, it was easy to identify where people lived and
what their trade or station in life was just by their dress.
Manning celebrates the inventiveness and initiative of the
computer business with book covers based on the rich
diversity of regional culture centuries ago, brought back to
life by pictures from collections such as this one.

Part 1 Conceptual
foundations
Part 1 lays the essential groundwork for understanding and
building causal models. Here, I’ll introduce key concepts
from statistics, probabilistic modeling, generative machine
learning, and Bayesian methods that will serve as our
building blocks for this book’s approach to causal modeling.
This part is all about arming you with the core concepts you
need to start solving causal problems with machine learning
tools.

1 Why causal AI
This chapter covers
Defining causal AI and its benefits
Incorporating causality into machine learning models
A simple example of applying causality to a machine
learning model
Subscription streaming platforms like Netflix are always
looking for ways to optimize various indicators of
performance. One of these is their churn rate, meaning the
rate at which they lose subscribers. Imagine that you are a
machine learning engineer or data scientist at Netflix tasked
with finding ways of reducing churn. What are the types of
causal questions (questions that require causal thinking) you
might ask with respect to this task?
Causal discovery —Given detailed data on who churned
and who did not, can you analyze that data to find
causes of the churn? Causal discovery investigates what
causes what.
Estimating average treatment effects (ATEs)—Suppose
the algorithm that recommends content to the user is a
cause of the churn; a better choice of algorithm might
reduce churn, but by how much? The task of quantifying
how much, on average, a cause drives an effect is the
ATE estimation. For example, some users could be
exposed to a new version of the algorithm, and you
could measure how much this affects churn, relative to
the baseline algorithm.

Let’s go a bit deeper. The mockumentary The Office (the
American version) was one of the most popular shows on
Netflix. Later, Netflix learned that NBCUniversal was planning
to stop licensing the show to Netflix to stream in the US, so
that US streaming of The Office would be exclusive to
NBCUniversal’s rival streaming platform, Peacock. Given the
popularity of the show, churn was certainly affected, but by
how much?
Estimating 
conditional 
average 
treatment 
effects
(CATEs) —The effect of losing The Office would be more
pronounced for some subscriber segments than others,
but what attributes define these segments? One
attribute is certainly having watched the show, but there
are others (demographics, other content watched, etc.).
CATE estimation is the task of quantifying how much a
cause drives an effect for a particular segment of the
population. Indeed, there are likely multiple segments we
could define, each with a different within-segment ATE.
Part of the task of CATE estimation is finding distinct
segments of interest.
Suppose you had reliable data on subscribers who quit
Netflix and signed up for Peacock to continue watching The
Office. For some of these users, the recommendation
algorithm failed to show them possible substitutes for The
Office, like the mockumentary Parks and Recreation. That
may lead to a different type of question.
Counterfactual 
reasoning 
and 
attribution —If 
the
algorithm had placed Parks and Recreation more
prominently in those users’ dashboards, would they have
stayed on with Netflix? These counterfactual questions
(“counter” to the “fact” that the show wasn’t prominent
in 
their 
dashboard) 
are 
essential 
for 
attribution

(assigning a root cause and credit/blame for an
outcome).
Netflix worked with Steve Carrel (star of The Office) and Greg
Daniels (writer, director, and producer of The Office) to
create the show Space Force as Netflix original content. The
show was released just months before The Office moved to
Peacock. Suppose that this show was Netflix’s attempt to
create content to retain subscribers who were fans of The
Office. Consider the decisions that would go into the creation
of such a show:
Causal decision theory —What actors/directors/writers
would tempt The Office fans to stay subscribed? What
themes and content?
Causal machine learning —How could we use generative
AI, such as large language models to create scripts and
pilots for the show in such a way that optimizes for the
objective of reducing churn amongst fans of The Office?
Causal inference is about breaking down a problem into
these types of specific causal queries, and then using data to
answer these queries. Causal AI is about building algorithms
that automate this analysis. We’ll tackle both of these
problem areas in this book.
1.1 What is causal AI?
To understand what causal AI is, we’ll start with the basic
ideas of causality and causal inference, and work our way
up. Then we’ll review the kinds of problems we can solve
with causal AI.
Causal reasoning is a crucial element of how humans
understand, explain, and make decisions about the world.
Anytime we think about cause (“Why did that happen?”) or

effect (“What will happen if I do this?”), we are practicing
causal reasoning.
In statistics and machine learning, we use data to lend
statistical rigor to our causal reasoning. But while cause-and-
effect relationships drive the data, statistical correlation
alone is insufficient to draw causal conclusions from data. For
this, we must turn to causal inference.
Statistical (non-causal) inference relies on statistical
assumptions. This is true even in deep learning, where
assumptions are often called “inductive bias.” Similarly,
causal inference relies on causal assumptions; causal
inference refers to a body of theory and practical methods
that constrain statistical analysis with causal assumptions.
Causal AI refers to the automation of causal inference. We
can leverage machine learning algorithms, which have
developed robust approaches to automating statistical
analyses and scale up to large amounts of data of different
modalities.
The goal of AI is automating reasoning tasks that until now
have required human intelligence to solve. Humans rely
heavily on causal reasoning to navigate the world, and while
we are better at causal reasoning than statistical reasoning,
our cognitive biases still make our causal reasoning highly
error prone. Improving our ability to answer causal questions
has been the work of millennia of philosophers, centuries of
scientists, and decades of statisticians. But now, a
convergence of statistical and computational advances has
shifted the focus from discourse to algorithms that we can
train on data and deploy to software. It is a fascinating time
to learn how to build causal AI.

KEY DEFINITIONS UNDERPINNING CAUSAL AI
Inference—Drawing conclusions from observations and
data
Assumptions—Constraints that guide inferences
Inductive biases—Another word for assumptions, often
used to refer to assumptions implicit in the choice of
machine learning algorithm
Statistical 
model—A 
framework 
using 
statistical
assumptions to analyze data
Data science—An interdisciplinary field that uses
statistical models along with other algorithms and
techniques to extract insights and knowledge from
structured and unstructured data
Causal 
inference—Techniques 
that 
use 
causal
assumptions to guide conclusions
Causal model—A statistical model built on causal
assumptions about data generation
Causal data science—Data science that employs
causal models to extract causal insights
Causal AI—Algorithms that automate causal inference
tasks using causal models

1.2 How this book approaches causal
inference
The goal of this book is the fusion of two powerful domains:
causality and AI. By the end of this journey, you’ll be
equipped with the skills to
Design AI systems with causal capabilities —Harness the
power of AI, but with an added layer of causal reasoning.
Use machine learning frameworks for causal inference —
Utilize tools like PyTorch and other Python libraries to
seamlessly integrate causal modeling into your projects.
Build tools for automated causal decision-making —
Implement causal decision-making algorithms, including
causal reinforcement learning algorithms.
Historically, causality and AI evolved from different bodies of
research, they have been applied to different problems, and
they have led to experts with different skill sets, books that
use different languages, and libraries with different
abstractions. This book is for anyone who wants to connect
these domains into one comprehensive skill set.
There are many books on causal inference, including books
that focus on causal inference in Python. The following
subsections discuss some features that make this book
unique.
1.2.1 Emphasis on AI
This book focuses on causal AI. We’ll cover not just the
relevance of causal inference to AI, or how machine learning
can scale up causal inference, but also focus on
implementation. Specifically, we’ll integrate causal models

with conventional models and training procedures from
probabilistic machine learning.
1.2.2 Focus on tech, retail, and business
Practical causal inference methods have developed from
econometrics, public health, social sciences, and other
domains where it is difficult to run randomized experiments.
As a result, examples in most books tend to come from those
domains. In contrast, this book leans heavily into examples
from tech, retail, and business.
1.2.3 Parallel world counterfactuals and other
queries beyond causal effects
When many think of “causal inference,” they think of
estimating causal effects, namely average treatment effects
(ATEs) and conditional average treatment effects (CATEs).
These are certainly important queries, but there are other
kinds of causal queries as well. This book gives due attention
to these other types.
For example, this book provides in-depth coverage of the
parallel worlds account of counterfactuals. In this approach,
when some cause and some effect occur, we imagine a
parallel universe where the causal event was different. For
example, suppose you asked, “I married for money and now
I’m sad. Would I have been happier had I married for love?”
With our parallel worlds approach, you’d use your experience
of marrying for money and being sad as inputs to a causal
model-based probabilistic simulation of your happiness in a
parallel universe where you married for love. This type of
reasoning is useful in decision-making. For example, it might
help you choose a better spouse next time.

Hopefully this example of love and regret illustrates how
fundamental this kind of “what could have been” thinking is
to human cognition (we’ll see more applied examples in
chapters 8 and 9). It therefore makes sense to learn how to
build AI with the same capabilities. But although they’re
useful, some counterfactual inferences are hard or
impossible to verify (you can’t prove you would have been
happier if you had married for love). Most causal inference
books only focus on the narrow set of counterfactuals we can
verify with data and experiments, which misses many
interesting, cognitive science-aligned, and practical use
cases of counterfactual reasoning. This book leans into those
use cases.
1.2.4 An assumption of commodification of
inference
Many causal inference books go deep into the statistical
inference nuts and bolts of various causal effect estimators.
But a major trend in the last decade of developing deep
learning frameworks is the commodification of inference.
This refers to how libraries like PyTorch abstract away the
difficult aspects of estimation and inference—if you can
define your estimation/inference problem in terms
minimizing a differentiable loss function, PyTorch will handle
the rest. The commodification of inference frees up the user
to focus on creating ever more nuanced and powerful
models, such as models that represent the causal structure
of the data-generating process.
In this book, we’ll focus on leveraging frameworks for
inference so that you can learn a universal view of modeling
techniques. Once you find the right modeling approach for
your domain, you can use other resources to go deep into
any statistical algorithm of interest.

1.2.5 Breaking down theory with code
One of the standout features of this book is its approach to
advanced topics in causal inference theory. Many
introductory texts shy away from subjects like identification,
the do-calculus, and the causal hierarchy theorem because
they are difficult. The problem is that if you want to create
causal-capable AI algorithms, you need an intuition for these
concepts.
In this book, we’ll make these topics accessible by relying on
Python libraries that implement their basic abstractions and
algorithms. We’ll build intuition for these advanced topics by
working with these primitives in code.
1.3 Causality’s role in modern AI
workflows
There is great value in positioning ourselves to build future
versions of AI with causal capabilities, but the topics covered
in this book will also have an impact on applications common
today. In this section, we’ll review how causality can enhance
some of these applications.
1.3.1 Better data science
Big tech and tech-powered retail organizations have
recognized the significance of causal inference, offering
premium salaries to those proficient in it. This is because the
essence of data science—deriving actionable insights from
data—is inherently causal.
When a data scientist examines the correlation between a
feature on an e-commerce site and sales, they do so because
they want to know whether the feature causally drives sales.

Causal inference can help answer this question in several
ways. First, it can help them design an experiment that will
quantify the causal effect of the feature on sales, especially
in the case where a perfect randomized experiment is not
possible. Second, if a proposed experiment is not feasible,
the data scientist can use past observational data and data
from related but different past experiments to infer the value
of the causal effect that would result from the proposed
experiment without actually running it. Finally, even if the
data scientist has complete freedom in running experiments,
causal inference can help select which experiment to run
and what variables to measure, minimizing the opportunity
cost of running wasteful or uninformative experiments.
1.3.2 Better attribution, credit assignment, and
root cause analysis
Causal inference also supports attribution. The “attribution
problem” in marketing is perhaps best articulated by a quote
credited to advertising pioneer John Wanamaker:
Half the money I spend on advertising is wasted; the
trouble is I don’t know which half.
In other words, it is difficult to know what advertisement,
promotion, or other action caused a specific customer
behavior, sales number, or other key business outcome.
Even in online marketing, where the data has gotten much
richer and more granular than in Wanamaker’s time,
attribution remains a challenge. For example, a user may
have clicked after seeing an ad, but was it that single ad
view that led to the click? Or were they going to click
anyway? Perhaps there was a cumulative effect of all the
nudges to click that they received over multiple channels.
Causal modeling addresses the attribution problem by using

formal causal logic to answer “why” questions, such as “why
did this user click?”
Attribution goes by other names in other domains, such as
“credit assignment” and “root cause analysis.” The core
meaning is the same; we want to understand why a
particular event outcome happened. We know what the
causes are in general, but we want to know how much a
particular cause is to blame in a given instance.
1.3.3 More robust, decomposable, and
explainable models
For organizations that use machine learning to build
software, incorporating causal modelling can improve both
the process and the product. In particular, causality adds
value by making machine learning more robust,
decomposable, and explainable.
MORE ROBUST MACHINE LEARNING
Machine learning models lack robustness when differences
between the environment where the model was trained and
the environment where the model is deployed cause the
model to break down. Causality can address the lack of
robustness in the following ways:
Overfitting —Overfitting occurs when learning algorithms
place too much weight on spurious statistical patterns in
the training data. Causal approaches can orient machine
learning models toward learning statistical patterns that
are rooted in causal relationships.
Underspecification —Underspecification 
occurs 
when
there are many equivalent configurations of a model that
perform equivalently on test data but perform differently
in 
the 
deployment 
environment. 
One 
sign 
of

underspecification is sensitivity to arbitrary elements of
the model’s configuration, such as a random seed.
Causal inference can tell you when a causal prediction is
“identified” (i.e., not “underspecified”), meaning a
unique answer exists given the assumptions and the
data.
Data drift —As time passes, the characteristics of the
data in the environment where you deploy the model
differ or “drift” from the characteristics of the training
data. Causal modeling addresses this by capturing
causal invariance underlying the data. For example,
suppose you train a model that uses elevation to predict
average temperature. If you train with data only from
high-elevation cities, it should still work well in low-
elevation cities if the model successfully fit the
underlying physics-based causal relationship between
altitude and temperature.
This is why leading tech companies deploy causal machine
learning techniques—they can make their machine learning
services more robust. It is also why notable deep learning
researchers are pursuing research that combines deep
learning with causal reasoning.
MORE DECOMPOSABLE MACHINE LEARNING
Causal models decompose into components, specifically
tuples of effects and their direct causes, which I’ll define
formally in chapter 3. To illustrate, let’s consider a simple
machine learning problem of predicting whether an
individual who sees a digital ad will go on to make a
purchase.
We could use various characteristics of the ad impression
(e.g., the number of times the ad was seen, the duration of
the view, the ad category, the time of day, etc.) as the

feature vector, and predict the purchase using a neural
network, as depicted in figure 1.1. The weights in the hidden
layers of the model are mutually dependent, so the model
cannot be reduced to smaller independent components.
Figure 1.1 A simple multilayer perceptron neural network that uses
features associated with ad impressions to predict whether a purchase
will result
On the other hand, if we take a causal view of the problem,
we might reason that an ad impression drives engagement,
and that the engagement drives whether an individual
makes a purchase. Using engagement metrics as another
feature vector, we could instead train the model shown in
figure 1.2. This model aligns with the causal structure of the
domain (i.e., ad impressions causing engagement, and
engagement causing purchases). As such, it decomposes
into two components: {ad impression, engagement} and
{engagement, purchase}.

Figure 1.2 A model that captures how ad impressions drive
engagement, which in turn drives purchases. This model decomposes
into {ad impression, engagement} and {engagement, purchase}.
There are several benefits of this decomposability:
Components of the model can be tested and validated
independently.
Components of the model can be executed separately,
enabling more efficient use of modern cloud computing
infrastructure and enabling edge computing.
When additional training data is available, only the
components relevant to the data need retraining.
Components of old models can be reused in new models
targeting new problems.
There 
is 
less 
sensitivity 
to 
suboptimal 
model
configuration and hyperparameter settings, because

components can be optimized separately.
The components of the causal model correspond to concepts
in the domain that you are modeling. This leads to the next
benefit, explainability.
MORE EXPLAINABLE MACHINE LEARNING
Many machine learning algorithms, particularly deep
learning algorithms, can be quite “black box,” meaning the
internal workings are not easily interpretable, and the
process by which the model produces an output for a given
input is not easily explainable.
In contrast, causal models are eminently explainable
because they directly encode easy-to-understand causal
relationships in the modeling domain. Indeed, causality is the
core of explanation; explaining an event means describing
the event’s causes and how they led to the event occurring.
Causal models provide explanations in the language of the
domain you are modeling (semantic explanations) rather
than in terms of the model’s architecture (such as syntactic
explanations of “nodes” and “activations”).
Consider the examples in figures 1.1 and 1.2. In figure 1.1,
only the input features and output are interpretable in terms
of the domain; the internal workings of the hidden layers are
not. Thus, given a particular ad impression, it is difficult to
explain how the model arrives at a particular purchase
outcome. In contrast, the example in figure 1.2 explicitly
provides engagement to explain how we get from an ad
impression to a purchase outcome.
The connections between engagement and ad impression,
and between purchase and engagement, are still black
boxes, but if we need to, we can make additional variables in

those black boxes explicit. We just need to make sure we do
so in a way that is aligned with our assumptions about the
causal structure of the problem.
1.3.4 Fairer AI
Suppose Bob applies for a business loan. A machine learning
algorithm predicts that Bob would be a bad loan candidate,
so Bob is rejected. Bob is a man, and he got ahold of the
bank’s loan data, which shows that men are less likely to
have their loan applications approved. Was this an “unfair”
outcome?
We might say the outcome is “unfair” if, for example, the
algorithm made that prediction because Bob is a man. To be
a “fair” prediction, it would need to be formulated from
factors relevant to Bob’s ability to pay back the loan, such as
his credit history, his line of business, or his available
collateral. Bob’s dilemma is another example of why we’d
like machine learning to be explainable: so that we can
analyze what factors in Bob’s application led to the
algorithm’s decision.
Suppose the training data came from a history of decisions
from loan officers, some of whom harbored a gender
prejudice that hurt men. For example, they might have read
studies that show men are more likely to default in times of
financial difficulty. Based on those studies, they decided to
deduct points from their rating if the applicant was a man.
Furthermore, suppose that when the data was collected, the
bank advertised the loan program on social media. When we
look at the campaign results, we notice that the men who
responded to the ad were, on average, less qualified than
the women who clicked on the ad. This discrepancy might
have been because the campaign was better targeted

toward women, or because the average bid price in online ad
auctions was lower when the ad audience was composed of
less-qualified men. Figure 1.3 plots various factors that might
influence the loan approval process, and it distinguishes fair
from unfair causes. The factors are plotted in a directed
acyclic graph (DAG), a popular and effective way to
represent causal relationships. We’ll use DAGs as our
workhorse for causal reasoning throughout the book.
Figure 1.3 A causal directed acyclic graph (DAG) showing how statistical
bias against a particular gender could come from an algorithm directly
penalizing that gender (unfair) and indirectly through gender
discrepancies in applicants targeted by digital advertising algorithms
(fair). Causal inference can parse the bias into fair and unfair sources.

Thus, we have two possible sources of statistical bias against
men in the data. One source of bias is from the online ad
that attracted men who were, on average, less qualified,
leading to a higher rejection rate for men. The other source
of statistical bias comes from the prejudice of loan officers.
One of these sources of bias is arguably “fair” (it’s hard to
blame the bank for the targeting behavior of digital
advertising algorithms), and one of the sources is “unfair”
(we can blame the bank for sexist loan policies). But when
we only look at the training data without this causal context,
all we see is statistical bias against men. The learning
algorithm reproduced this bias when it made its decision
about Bob.
One naive solution to this problem is simply to remove
gender labels from the training data. But even if those sexist
loan officers didn’t see an explicit indication of the person’s
gender, they could infer it from elements of the application,
such as the person’s name. Those loan officers encode their
prejudicial views in the form of a statistical correlation
between those proxy variables for gender and loan outcome.
The machine learning algorithm would discover this
statistical pattern and use it to make predictions. As a result,
you could have a situation where the algorithm produces two
different predictions for two individuals who had the same
repayment risk but differed in gender, even if gender wasn’t
a direct input to the prediction. Deploying this algorithm
would effectively scale up the harm caused by those loan
officers’ prejudicial views.
For these reasons, we can see how many fears about the
widespread deployment of machine learning algorithms are
justified. Without corrections, these algorithms could
adversely impact our society by magnifying the unfair
outcomes captured in the data that our society produces.

Causal analysis is instrumental in parsing these kinds of
algorithmic fairness issues. In this example, we could use
causal analysis to parse the statistical bias into “unfair” bias
due to sexism and bias due to external factors like how the
digital advertising service targets ads. Ultimately, we could
use causal modeling to build a model that only considers
variables causally relevant to whether an individual can
repay a loan.
It is important to note that causal inference alone is
insufficient to solve algorithmic fairness. Causal inference
can help parse statistical bias into what is fair and what’s
not. And yet, even that depends on all parties involved
agreeing on definitions of concepts and outcomes, which is
often a tall order. To illustrate, suppose that the social media
ad campaign served the loan ad to more men because the
cost of serving an ad to men is cheaper. Thus, an ad
campaign can win the online ad spot auctions with lower
bids when the impression is coming from a man, and, as a
result, more men see the ad, though many of these men are
not good matches for the loan program. Was this process
unfair? Is the result unfair? What is the fairness tradeoff
between balanced outcomes across genders and pricing
fairness to advertisers? Should some advertisers have to pay
more due to pricing mechanisms designed to encourage
balanced outcomes? Causal analysis can’t solve these
questions, but it can help understand them in technical
detail.
1.4 How causality is driving the next
AI wave
Incorporating causal logic into machine learning is leading to
new advances in AI. Three trending areas of AI highlighted in
this book are representation learning, reinforcement

learning, and large language models. These trends in causal
AI are reminiscent of the early days of deep learning. People
already working with neural networks when the deep
learning wave was gaining momentum enjoyed first dibs on
new opportunities in this space, and access to opportunities
begets access to more opportunities. The next wave of AI is
still taking shape, but it is clear it will fundamentally
incorporate some representation of causality. The goal of this
book is to help you ride that wave.
1.4.1 Causal representation learning
Many state-of-the-art deep learning methods attempt to
learn geometric representations of the objects being
modeled. However, these methods struggle with learning
causally meaningful representations. For example, consider a
video of a child holding a helium-filled balloon on a string.
Suppose we had a corresponding vector representation of
that image. If the vector representation were causally
meaningful, then manipulating the vector to remove the
child and converting the manipulated vector to a new video
would result in a depiction of the balloon rising upwards.
Causal representation learning is a promising area of deep
representation learning that’s still in its early stages. This
book provides several examples in different chapters of
causal models built upon deep learning architectures,
providing an introduction to the fundamental ideas used in
this exciting new growth area of causal AI.
1.4.2 Causal reinforcement learning
In canonical reinforcement learning, learning agents ingest
large amounts of data and learn like Pavlov’s dog; they learn
actions that correlate positively with good outcomes and
negatively with bad outcomes. However, as we all know,
correlation does not imply causation. Causal reinforcement

learning can highlight cases where the action that causes a
higher reward differs from the action that correlates most
strongly with high rewards. Further, it addresses the problem
of credit assignment (correctly attributing rewards to
actions) with counterfactual reasoning (i.e., asking questions
like “how much reward would the agent have received had
they been using a different policy?”). Chapter 12 is devoted
to causal reinforcement learning and other areas of causal
decision-making.
1.4.3 Large language models and foundation
models
Large language models (LLMs) such as OpenAI’s GPT,
Google’s Gemini, and Meta’s Llama are deep neural
language models with many billions of parameters trained on
vast amounts of text and other data. These models can
generate highly coherent natural language, code, and
content of other modalities. They are foundation models,
meaning they provide a foundation for building more
domain-specific machine learning models and products.
These products, such as Microsoft 365 Copilot, are already
having a tremendous business impact.
A new area of investigation and product development
investigates LLMs’ ability to answer causal questions and
perform causal analysis. Another line of investigation is using
causal methods to design and train new LLMs with optimized
causal capabilities. In chapter 13, we’ll explore the
intersection of LLMs and causality.

1.5 A machine learning-themed
primer on causality
Now that you’ve seen the many ways that causal inference
can improve machine learning, let’s look at the process of
incorporating causality into AI models. To do this, we will use
a popular benchmark dataset often used in machine
learning: the MNIST dataset of images of handwritten digits,
each labeled with the actual digit represented in the image.
Figure 1.4 illustrates multiple examples of the digits in
MNIST.

Figure 1.4 Each image in the MNIST dataset is an image of a written
digit, and each image is labeled with the digit it represents.
MNIST is essentially the “Hello World” of machine learning. It
is primarily used to experiment with different machine
learning algorithms and to compare their relative strengths.
The basic prediction task is to take the matrix of pixels
representing each image as input and return the correct
image label as output. Let’s start the process of

incorporating causal thinking into a probabilistic machine
learning model applied to MNIST images.
1.5.1 Queries, probabilities, and statistics
First, we’ll look at the basic process without including causal
inference. Machine learning can use probability in analyses
about quantities of interest. To do so, a probabilistic machine
learning model learns a probabilistic representation of all the
variables in that system. We can make predictions and
decisions with probabilistic machine learning models using a
three-step process.
1. Pose the question —What is the question you want to
answer?
2. Write down the math —What probability (or probability-
related quantity) will answer the question, given the
evidence or data?
3. Do the statistical inference —What statistical analysis will
give you (or will estimate) that quantity?
There is more formal terminology for these steps (query,
estimand, and estimator) but we’ll avoid the jargon for now.
Instead, we’ll start with a simple statistical example problem.
Your step 1 might be “How tall are Bostonians?” For step 2,
you might decide that knowing the mean height (in
probability terms, the “expected value”) of everyone who
lives in Boston will answer your question. Step 3 might
involve randomly selecting 100 Bostonians and taking their
average height; statistical theorems guarantee that this
sample average is a close estimate of the true population
mean.
Let’s extend that workflow to modeling MNIST images.

STEP 1: POSE THE QUESTION
Suppose we are looking at the MNIST image in figure 1.5,
which could be a “4” or could be a “9”. In step 1, we
articulate a question, such as “given this image, what is the
digit represented in this image?”
Figure 1.5 Is this an image of the digit 4 or 9? The canonical task of the
MNIST dataset is to classify the digit label given the image.
STEP 2: WRITE DOWN THE MATH
In step 2, we want to find some probabilistic quantity that
answers the question, given the evidence or data. In other

words, we want to find something we can write down in
probability math notation that can answer the question from
step 1. For our example with figure 1.5, the “evidence” or
“data” is the image. Is the image a 4 or a 9? Let the variable
I represent the image and D represent the digit. In
probability notation, we can write the probability that the
digit is a 4, given the image, as P(D=4|I=
), where I=
 is
shorthand for I being equal to some vector representation of
the image. We can compare this probability to P(D=9|I=
),
and choose the value of D that has the higher probability.
Generalizing to all ten digits, the mathematical quantity we
want in step 2 is shown in figure 1.6.
Figure 1.6 Choose the digit with the highest probability, given the
image.
In plain English, this is “the value d that maximizes the
probability that D equals d, given the image,” where d is one
of the ten digits (0–9).
STEP 3: DO THE STATISTICAL INFERENCE
Step 3 uses statistical analysis to assign a number to the
quantity we identified in step 2. There are any number of
ways we can do this. For example, we could train a deep
neural network that takes in the image as an input and
predicts the digit as an output; we could design the neural
net to assign a probability to D=d for every value d.

1.5.2 Causality and MNIST
So how could causality feature in the previous section’s
three-step analysis? Yann LeCun is a Turing Award winner
(computer science’s equivalent of the Nobel prize) for his
work on deep learning, and he’s director of AI research at
Meta. He is also one of the three researchers behind the
creation of MNIST. He discusses the causal backstory of the
MNIST data on his personal website,
https://yann.lecun.com/exdb/mnist/index.xhtml:
The MNIST database was constructed from NIST’s Special
Database 3 and Special Database 1 which contain binary
images of handwritten digits. NIST originally designated
SD-3 as their training set and SD-1 as their test set.
However, SD-3 is much cleaner and easier to recognize
than SD-1. The reason for this can be found on the fact
that SD-3 was collected among Census Bureau
employees, while SD-1 was collected among high-school
students. Drawing sensible conclusions from learning
experiments requires that the result be independent of
the choice of training set and test among the complete
set of samples. Therefore, it was necessary to build a
new database by mixing NIST’s datasets.
In other words, the authors mixed the two datasets because
they argue that if they trained a machine learning model
solely on digits drawn by high schoolers, it would
underperform when applied to digits drawn by bureaucrats.
However, in real-world settings, we want robust models that
can learn in one scenario and predict in another, even when
those scenarios differ. For example, we want a spam filter to
keep working when the spammers switch from Nigerian
princes to Bhutanese princesses. We want our self-driving
cars to stop even when there is graffiti on the stop sign.

Shuffling the data like a deck of cards is a luxury not easily
afforded in real-world settings.
Causal modeling leverages knowledge about the causal
mechanisms underlying how the digits are drawn that will
help models generalize beyond high school students and
bureaucrats in the training data to high schoolers in the test
data. Figure 1.7 illustrates a causal DAG representing this
system.
Figure 1.7 An example causal DAG representing the generation of
MNIST images. The nodes represent objects in the data generating
process, and edges correspond to causal relationships between those
objects.
This particular DAG imagines that the writer determines the
thickness and curviness of the drawn digits, and that high
schoolers tend to have a different handwriting style than
bureaucrats. The graph also assumes that the writer’s
classification is a cause of what digits they draw. Perhaps
bureaucrats write more 1s, 0s, and 5s, as these numbers

occur more frequently in census work, while high schoolers
draw other digits more often because they do more long
division in math classes (this is a similar idea to how, in topic
models, “topics” cause the frequency of words in a
document). Finally, the DAG assumes that age is a common
cause of writer type and image; you have to be below a
certain age to be in high school and above a certain age to
be a census official.
A causal modeling approach would use this causal
knowledge to train a predictive model that could extrapolate
from the high school training data to the bureaucrat test
data. Such a model would generalize better to new situations
where the distributions of writer type and other variables are
different than in the training data.
1.5.3 Causal queries, probabilities, and
statistics
At the beginning of this chapter, I discussed various types of
causal questions we can pose, such as causal discovery,
quantifying causal effects, and causal decision-making. We
can answer these and various other questions with a causal
variation on our previous three-step analysis (pose the
question, write down the math, do the statistical inference):
1. Pose the causal question —What is the question you
want to answer?
2. Write down the causal math —What probability (or
expectation) will answer the causal question, given the
evidence or data?
3. Do the statistical inference —What statistical analysis will
give you (or “estimate”) that causal quantity?
Note that the third step is the same as in the original three
steps. The causal nuance occurs in the first and second

steps.
STEP 1: POSE THE CAUSAL QUESTION
These are examples of some causal questions we could ask
about our causal MNIST model:
“How much does the writer’s type (high schooler vs.
bureaucrat) affect the look of an image of the digit 4 with
level 3 thickness?” (Conditional average treatment effect
estimation is discussed in chapter 11).
Assuming that stroke thickness is a cause of the image,
we might ask, “What would a 2 look like if it were as
curvy as possible?” (This is intervention prediction,
discussed in chapter 7).
“Given an image, how would it have turned out
differently if the stroke curviness were heavier?” (See
counterfactual reasoning, discussed in chapters 8 and 9).
“What should the stroke curviness be to get an
aesthetically ideal image?” (Causal decision-making is
discussed in chapter 12).
Let’s consider the CATE in the first item. CATE estimation is a
common causal inference question applied to ordinary
tabular data, but rarely do we see it in the applied in the
context of an AI computer vision problem.
STEP 2: WRITE DOWN THE CAUSAL MATH
Causal inference theory tells us how to mathematically
formalize our causal question. Using special causal notation,
we can mathematically formalize our CATE query as follows:

where E(.) is an expectation operator. We’ll review
expectation in the next chapter, but for now we can think of
it as an averaging of pixels across images.
The preceding use of subscripts is a special notation called
“counterfactual notation” that represents an intervention. A
random assignment in an experiment is a real-world
intervention, but there are many experiments we can’t run in
the real world. For example, it wouldn’t be feasible to run a
trial where you randomly assign participants to either be a
high school student or be a census bureau official.
Nonetheless, we want to know how the writer type causally
impacts the images, and thus we rely on a causal model and
its ability to represent interventions.
To illustrate, figure 1.8 visualizes what CATE might look like.
The challenge is deriving the differential image at the right
of figure 1.8. Causal inference theory helps us address
potential age-related “confounding” bias in quantifying how
much writer type drives the image. For example, the do-
calculus (chapter 10) is a set of graph-based rules that
allows us to take this DAG and algorithmically derive the
following equation:
The left side of this equation defines the expectations used
in the CATE definition in the second step—it is a theoretical
construct that captures the hypothetical condition “if writer
type were set to ‘w’”. But the right side is actionable; it is
composed entirely of terms we could estimate using
machine learning methods on a hypothetical version of NIST
image data labeled with the writers’ ages.

Figure 1.8 Visualization of an example CATE of writer type on an image.
It is the pixel-by-pixel difference of the expected image under one
intervention (W="high school") minus the expected image under
another intervention (W="bureaucrat"), with both expectations
conditional on being images of the digit 4 with a certain level of
thickness.
STEP 3: DO THE STATISTICAL INFERENCE
Step 3 does the statistical estimation, and there are several
ways we could estimate the quantities on the right side of
that equation. For example, we could use a convolutional
neural network to model E (I |W = w, A = a, D = d, T = t), and
build a probability model of the joint distribution P (A, D, T).
The choice of statistical modeling approach involves the
usual statistical trade-offs, such as ease-of-use, bias and
variance, scalability to large data, and parallelizability.
Other books go into great detail on preferred statistical
methods for step 3. I take the strongly opinionated view that
we should rely on the “commodification of inference” trend

in statistical modeling and machine learning frameworks to
handle step 3, and instead focus on honing our skills on
steps 1 and 2: figuring out the right questions to ask, and
representing the possible causes mathematically.
As you’ve seen in this section, our journey into causal AI is
scaffolded by a three-step process, and the essence of
causal thinking emerges prominently in the first two steps.
Step 1 invites us to frame the right causal questions, while
step 2 illuminates the mathematics behind these questions.
Step 3 leverages patterns we’re well-accustomed to in
traditional statistical prediction and inference.
Using this structured approach, we’ll transition in the coming
chapters from purely predictive machine learning models—
like the deep latent variable models you might be familiar
with from MNIST—to causal machine learning models that
offer deeper insights into and answers to our causal
questions. First, we will review the underlying mathematics
and machine learning foundations. Then, in part 2 of the
book, we’ll delve into crafting the right questions and
articulating them mathematically for steps 1 and 2. For step
3, we’ll harness the power of contemporary tools like PyTorch
and other advanced libraries to bridge the causal concepts
with cutting-edge statistical learning algorithms.
Summary
Causal AI seeks to augment statistical learning and
probabilistic reasoning with causal logic.
Causal inference helps data scientists extract more
causal insights from observational data (the vast
majority of data in the world) and experimental data.
When data scientists can’t run experiments, causal
models can simulate experiments from observational

data.
They can use these simulations to make causal
inferences, such as estimating causal effects, and even
to prioritize interesting experiments to run in real life.
Causal inference also helps data scientists improve
decision-making 
in 
their 
organizations 
through
algorithmic counterfactual reasoning and attribution.
Causal inference also makes machine learning more
robust, decomposable, and explainable.
Causal analysis is useful for formally analyzing fairness
in predictive algorithms and for building fairer algorithms
by parsing ordinary statistical bias into its causal
sources.
The commodification of inference is a trend in machine
learning 
that 
refers 
to 
how 
universal 
modeling
frameworks like PyTorch continuously automate the nuts
and 
bolts 
of 
statistical 
learning 
and 
probabilistic
inference. The trend reduces the need for the modeler to
be an expert at the formal and statistical details of
causal inference and allows them to focus on turning
domain expertise into better causal models of their
problem domain.
Types of causal inference tasks include causal discovery,
intervention 
prediction, 
causal 
effect 
estimation,
counterfactual reasoning, explanation, and attribution.
The way we build and work with probabilistic machine
learning models can be extended to causal generative
models implemented in probabilistic machine learning
tools such as PyTorch.

2 A primer on probabilistic
generative modeling
This chapter covers
A primer on probability models
Computational probability with the pgmpy and Pyro libraries
Statistics for causality: data, populations, and models
Distinguishing between probability models and subjective
Bayesianism
Chapter 1 made the case for learning how to code causal AI. This
chapter will introduce some fundamentals we need to tackle causal
modeling with probabilistic machine learning, which roughly refers
to machine learning techniques that use probability to model
uncertainty and simulate data. There is a flexible suite of cutting-
edge tools for building probabilistic machine learning models. This
chapter will introduce the concepts from probability, statistics,
modeling, inference, and even philosophy that we will need in order
to implement key ideas from causal inference with the probabilistic
machine learning approach.
This chapter will not provide a mathematically exhaustive
introduction to these ideas. I’ll focus on what is needed for the rest
of this book and omit the rest. Any data scientist seeking causal
inference expertise should not neglect the practical nuances of
probability, statistics, machine learning, and computer science. See
the chapter notes at https://www.altdeep.ai/p/causalaibook for
recommended resources where you can get deeper introductions or
review materials.
In this chapter, I’ll introduce two Python programming libraries for
probabilistic machine learning:
pgmpy is a library for building probabilistic graphical models. As
a traditional graphical modeling tool, it is far less flexible and

cutting-edge than Pyro but also easier to use and debug. What
it does, it does well.
Pyro is a general probabilistic machine learning library. It is
quite flexible, and it leverages PyTorch’s cutting-edge gradient-
based learning techniques.
Pyro and pgmpy are the general modeling libraries we’ll use in this
book. Other libraries we’ll use are designed specifically for causal
inference.
2.1 Primer on probability
Let’s review the probability theory you’ll need to work with this
book. We’ll start with a few basic mathematical axioms and their
logical extensions without yet adding any real-world interpretation.
Let’s begin with the concrete idea of a simple three-sided die (these
exist).
2.1.1 Random variables and probability
A random variable is a variable whose possible values are the
numerical outcomes of a random phenomenon. These values can
be discrete or continuous. In this section, we’ll focus on the discrete
case. For example, the values of a discrete random variable
representing a three-sided die roll could be {1, 2, 3}. Alternatively,
in a 0-indexed programming language like Python, it might be
better to use {0, 1, 2}. Similarly, a discrete random variable
representing a coin flip could have outcomes {0, 1} or {True,
False}. Figure 2.1 illustrates three-sided dice.

Figure 2.1 Three-sided dice each represent a random variable with three
discrete outcomes.
The typical approach to notation is to write random variables with
capitals like X, Y, and Z. For example, suppose X represents a die
roll with outcomes {1, 2, 3}, and the outcome represents the
number on the side of the die. X = 1 and X = 2 represent the events
of rolling a 1 and 2 respectively. If we want to abstract away the
specific outcome with a variable, we typically use lowercase. For
example, I would use “X = x” (e.g., X = 1) to represent the event “I
rolled an ‘x ’!” where x can be any value in {1, 2, 3}. See figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2 X represents the outcome of a three-sided die roll. If the die roles a
2, the observed outcome is X=2.
Each outcome of a random variable has a probability value. The
probability value is often called a probability mass for discrete
variables and a probability density for continuous variables. For
discrete variables, probability values are between zero and one,
and summing up the probability values for each possible outcome

yields 1. For continuous variables, probability densities are greater
than zero, and integrating the probability densities over each
possible outcome yields 1.
Given a random variable with outcomes {0, 1} representing a coin
flip, what is the probability value assigned to 0? What about 1? At
this point, we just know the two values are between zero and one,
and that they sum to one. To go beyond that, we have to talk about
how to interpret probability. First, though, let’s hash out a few more
concepts.
2.1.2 Probability distributions and distribution
functions
A probability distribution function is a function that maps the
random variable outcomes to a probability value. For example, if
the outcome of a coin flip is 1 (heads) and the probability value is
0.51, the distribution function maps 1 to 0.51. I stick to the
standard notation P (X=x), as in P (X=1) = 0.51. For longer
expressions, when the random variable is obvious, I drop the capital
letter and keep the outcome, so P (X =x ) becomes P (x ), and P 
(X=1) becomes P (1).
If the random variable has a finite set of discrete outcomes, we can
represent the probability distribution with a table. For example, a
random variable representing outcomes {1, 2, 3} might look like
figure 2.3.
Figure 2.3 A simple tabular representation of a discrete distribution
In this book, I adopt the common notation P(X) to represent the
probability distribution over all possible outcomes of X, while P (X = 
x ) represents the probability value of a specific outcome. To
implement a probability distribution as an object in pgmpy, we’ll
use the DiscreteFactor class.

Listing 2.1 Implementing a discrete distribution table in pgmpy
from pgmpy.factors.discrete import DiscreteFactor
dist = DiscreteFactor(
    variables=["X"],    #1
    cardinality=[3],    #2
    values=[.45, .30, .25],  #3
    state_names= {'X': ['1', '2', '3']}     #4
)
print(dist)
#1 A list of the names of the variables in the factor
#2 The cardinality (number of possible outcomes) of each variable in the factor
#3 The values each variable in the factor can take
#4 A dictionary, where the key is the variable name and the value is a list of the
names of that variable’s outcomes
This code prints out the following:
+------+----------+
| X    |   phi(X) |
+======+==========+
| X(1) |   0.4500 |
+------+----------+
| X(2) |   0.3000 |
+------+----------+
| X(3) |   0.2500 |
+------+----------+
SETTING UP YOUR ENVIRONMENT
This code was written with pgmpy version 0.1.24 and Pyro
version 1.8.6. The version of pandas used was 1.5.3.
See https://www.altdeep.ai/p/causalaibook for links to the Jupyter
notebooks for each chapter, with the code and notes on setting
up a working environment.
2.1.3 Joint probability and conditional probability
Often, we are interested in reasoning about more than one random
variable. Suppose, in addition to the random variable X in figure
2.1, there was an additional random variable Y with two outcomes
{0, 1}. Then there is a joint probability distribution function that
maps each combination of X and Y to a probability value.

Figure 2.4 A simple representation of a tabular joint probability distribution
As a table, it could look like figure 2.4.
The DiscreteFactor object can represent joint distributions as well.
Listing 2.2 Modeling a joint distribution in pgmpy
joint = DiscreteFactor(
    variables=['X', 'Y'],   #1
    cardinality=[3, 2],     #2
values=[.25, .20, .20, .10, .15, .10],     #3
    state_names= {
        'X': ['1', '2', '3'],    #3
        'Y': ['0', '1']    #3
    }
)
print(joint)     #4
#1 Now we have two variables instead of one.
#2 X has 3 outcomes, Y has 2.
#3 Now there are two variables, so we name the outcomes for both variables.
#4 You can look at the printed output to see how the values are ordered of
values.
The preceding code prints this output:
+------+------+------------+
| X    | Y    |   phi(X,Y) |
+======+======+============+
| X(1) | Y(0) |     0.2500 |
+------+------+------------+
| X(1) | Y(1) |     0.2000 |
+------+------+------------+
| X(2) | Y(0) |     0.2000 |
+------+------+------------+
| X(2) | Y(1) |     0.1000 |
+------+------+------------+
| X(3) | Y(0) |     0.1500 |
+------+------+------------+
| X(3) | Y(1) |     0.1000 |
+------+------+------------+
Note that the probability values sum to 1. Further, when we
marginalize (i.e., “sum over” or “integrate over”) Y across the rows,
we recover the original distribution P (X  ), (aka the marginal

distribution of X  ). Summing up over the rows in figure 2.5 produces
the marginal distribution of X on the bottom.
Figure 2.5 Marginalizing over Y yields the marginal distribution of X.
The marginalize method will sum over the specified variables for us.
print(joint.marginalize(variables=['Y'], inplace=False))
This prints the following output:
+------+----------+
| X    |   phi(X) |
+======+==========+
| X(1) |   0.4500 |
+------+----------+
| X(2) |   0.3000 |
+------+----------+
| X(3) |   0.2500 |
+------+----------+
Setting the inplace argument to False gives us a new marginalized
table rather than modifying the original joint distribution table.
Figure 2.6 Marginalizing over X yields the marginal distribution of Y.
Similarly, when we marginalize X over the columns, we get P (Y  ). In
figure 2.6, summing over the values of X in the columns gives us
the marginal distribution of Y on the right.
print(joint.marginalize(variables=['X'], inplace=False))

This prints the following output:
+------+----------+
| Y    |   phi(Y) |
+======+==========+
| Y(0) |   0.6000 |
+------+----------+
| Y(1) |   0.4000 |
+------+----------+
I’ll use the notation P (X, Y  ) to represent joint distributions. I’ll use
P (X =x, Y = y) to represent an outcome probability, and for
shorthand, I’ll write P (x, y). For example, in figure 2.6, P (X =1, Y = 
0) = P (1, 0) = 0.25. We can define a joint distribution on any
number of variables; if there were three variables {X, Y, Z  }, I’d
write the joint distribution as P (X, Y, Z  ).
In this tabular representation of the joint probability distribution,
the number of cells increases exponentially with each additional
variable. There are some (but not many) “canonical” joint
probability distributions (such as the multivariate normal
distribution—I’ll show more examples in section 2.1.7). For that
reason, in multivariate settings, we tend to work with conditional
probability distributions.
The conditional probability of Y, given X, is
Intuitively, P (Y  |X  = 1) refers to the probability distribution for Y
conditional on X being 1. In the case of tabular representations of
distributions, we can derive the conditional distribution table by
dividing the cells in the joint probability distribution table with the
marginal probability values, as in figure 2.7. Note that the columns
on the conditional probability table in figure 2.7 now sum to 1.

Figure 2.7 Derive the values of the conditional probability distribution by
dividing the values of the joint distribution by those of the marginal
distribution.
The pgmpy library allows us to do this division using the “/”
operator:
print(joint / dist)
That line produces the following output:
+------+------+------------+
| X    | Y    |   phi(X,Y) |
+======+======+============+
| X(1) | Y(0) |     0.5556 |
+------+------+------------+
| X(1) | Y(1) |     0.4444 |
+------+------+------------+
| X(2) | Y(0) |     0.6667 |
+------+------+------------+
| X(2) | Y(1) |     0.3333 |
+------+------+------------+
| X(3) | Y(0) |     0.6000 |
+------+------+------------+
| X(3) | Y(1) |     0.4000 |
+------+------+------------+
Also, you can directly specify a conditional probability distribution
table with the TabularCPD class:

from pgmpy.factors.discrete.CPD import TabularCPD
PYgivenX = TabularCPD(
    variable='Y',    #1
    variable_card=2,     #2
    values=[  
        [.25/.45, .20/.30, .15/.25],     #3
        [.20/.45, .10/.30, .10/.25],     #3
    ], 
    evidence=['X'],
    evidence_card=[3],
    state_names = {
        'X': ['1', '2', '3'],
        'Y': ['0', '1']
    })
print(PYgivenX)
#1 A conditional distribution has one variable instead of ΔiscreteFactor’s list of
variables.
#2 variable_card is the cardinality of Y.
#3 Elements of the list correspond to outcomes for Y. Elements of each list
correspond to elements of X.
That produces the following output:
+------+--------------------+---------------------+------+
| X    | X(1)               | X(2)                | X(3) |
+------+--------------------+---------------------+------+
| Y(0) | 0.5555555555555556 | 0.6666666666666667  | 0.6  |
+------+--------------------+---------------------+------+
| Y(1) | 0.4444444444444445 | 0.33333333333333337 | 0.4  |
+------+--------------------+---------------------+------+
The variable_card argument is the cardinality of Y (meaning the
number of outcomes Y can take), and evidence_card is the cardinality
of X.

CONDITIONING AS AN OPERATION
In the phrase “conditional probability,” “conditional” is an
adjective. It is useful to think of “condition” as a verb (an action).
You condition a random variable like Y on another random
variable X. For example, in figure 2.5, I can condition Y on X=1,
and essentially get a new random variable with the same
outcome values as Y but with a probability distribution equivalent
to P(Y|X=1).
For those with more programming experience, think of
conditioning on X = 1 as filtering on the event X == 1; for
example, “what is the probability distribution of Y when X == 1?”
Filtering in this sense is like the WHERE clause in a SQL query. P(Y) is
the distribution of the rows in the Y table when your query is
SELECT * FROM Y, and P(Y|X=1) is the distribution of the rows when
your query is SELECT * FROM Y WHERE X=1.
Thinking of “conditioning” as an action helps us better
understand probabilistic machine learning libraries. In these
libraries, you have objects representing random variables, and
conditioning is an operation applied to these objects. As you’ll
see, the idea of conditioning as an action also contrasts nicely
with the core causal modeling concept of “intervention,” where
we “intervene” on a random variable.
Pyro implements conditioning as an operation with the
pyro.condition function. We’ll explore this in chapter 3.
2.1.4 The chain rule, the law of total probability, and
Bayes Rule
From the basic axioms of probability, we can derive the chain rule
of probability, the law of total probability, and Bayes rule. These
laws of probability are especially important in the context of
probabilistic modeling and causal modeling, so we’ll highlight them
briefly.

The chain rule of probability states that we can factorize a joint
probability into the product of conditional probabilities. For example
P (X, Y, Z ) can be factorized as follows:
We can factorize in any order we like. Above, the ordering was X,
then Y, then Z. However, Y, then Z, then X, or Z, then X, then Y, and
other orderings are just as valid.
The chain rule is important from a modeling and a computational
perspective. The challenge of implementing a single object that
represents P (X, Y, Z ) is that it needs to map each combination of
possible outcomes for X, Y, and Z to a probability value. The chain
rule lets us break this into three separate tasks for each factor in a
factorization of P (X, Y, Z ).
The law of total probability allows you to relate marginal probability
distributions (distributions of individual variables) to joint
distributions. For example, if we want to derive the marginal
distribution of X, denoted P(X), from the distribution of X and Y,
denoted P (X, Y  ), we can sum over Y.
In figure 2.5, we did this by summing over Y in the rows to get P 
(X ). In the case where X is a continuous random variable, we
integrate over Y rather than summing over Y.
Finally, we have Bayes rule:

We derive this by taking the original definition of conditional
probability and applying the chain rule to the numerator:
By itself, the Bayes rule is not particularly interesting—it’s a
derivation. The more interesting idea is Bayesianism, a philosophy
that uses Bayes rule to help the modeler reason about their
subjective uncertainty regarding the problems they are modeling.
I’ll touch on this in section 2.4.
2.1.5 Markovian assumptions and Markov kernels
A common approach to modeling when you have chains of factors
is to use Markovian assumptions. This modeling approach takes an
ordering of variables and makes a simplifying assumption that
every element in the ordering depends only on the element that
came directly before it. For example, consider again the following
factorization of P (x, y, z):
If we applied a Markovian assumption, this would simplify to:
This would let us replace P (z  |x, y) with P (z  |y), which is easier to
model. In this book, when we have a factor from a factorization that
has been simplified using the Markov assumption, like P (z  |y), we’ll
call it a Markov kernel.
The Markov assumption is a common simplifying assumption in
statistics and machine learning; Z may actually still depend on X
after accounting for Y, but we’re assuming that the dependence is
weak and we can safely ignore it in our model. We’ll see that the
Markovian assumption is key to graphical causality, where we’ll
assume effects are independent of their indirect causes, given their
direct causes.

2.1.6 Parameters
Suppose I wanted to implement in code an abstract representation
of a probability distribution, like the tabular distribution in figure
2.1, that I could use for different finite discrete outcomes. To start, if
I were to model another three-sided die, it might have different
probability values. What I want to keep is the basic structure as in
figure 2.8.
Figure 2.8 The scaffolding for a tabular probability distribution data structure
In code, I could represent this as some object type with a
constructor that takes two arguments, ρ1 and ρ2, as in figure 2.9
(“ρ” is the Greek letter “rho”).
Figure 2.9 Adding parameters to the data structure
The reason the third probability value is a function of the other two
(instead of a third argument, ρ3) is because the probability values
must sum to one. The set of two values {ρ1, ρ2} are the parameters
of the distribution. In programming terms, I could create a data
type that represents a table with three values. Then, when I want a
new distribution, I could construct a new instance of this type with
these two parameters as arguments.
Finally, in my three-sided die example, there were three outcomes,
{1, 2, 3}. Perhaps I want my data structure to handle a different
prespecified number of outcomes. In that case, I’d need a
parameter for the number of outcomes. Let’s denote that with the
Greek letter kappa, Κ. My parameterization is {Κ, ρ1, ρ2, … ρΚ–1},
where ρΚ is 1 minus the sum of the other ρ parameters.

In the pgmpy classes DiscreteFactor and TabularCPD, the ρ’s (rhos) are
the list of values passed to the values argument, and the Κ
corresponds to the values passed to the cardinality, variable_card,
and evidence_card arguments. Once we have a representation of a
probability distribution like TabularCPD, we can specify an instance of
that distribution with a set of parameters.
GREEKS VS. ROMANS
In this book, I use Roman letters (A, B, and C) to refer to random
variables representing objects in the modeling domain, such as a
“dice roll” or “gross domestic product,” and I use Greek letters for
so-called parameters. Parameters in this context are values that
characterize the probability distributions of the Roman-lettered
variables. This distinction between Greeks and Romans is not as
important in statistics; for example, a Bayesian statistician treats
both Roman and Greek letters as random variables. However, in
causal modeling the difference matters, because Roman letters
can be causes and effects, while Greek letters serve to
characterize the statistical relationship between causes and
effects.
2.1.7 Canonical classes of probability distribution
There are several common classes of distribution functions. For
example, the tabular examples we just studied are examples from
the class of categorical distributions. Categorical distributions are
distributions on discrete outcomes we can view as categories, such
as {“ice cream”, “frozen yogurt”, “sherbet”}. A Bernoulli
distribution class is a special case of the categorical class where
there are only two possible outcomes. A discrete uniform
distribution is a categorical distribution where all outcomes have
the same probability. In implementation, categorical distributions
are defined either on the categories directly (like “tails” and
“heads”) or on indices to the category (like 0 and 1).

DISCRETE VS. CONTINUOUS RANDOM VARIABLES
For discrete random variables, we have been using have
probability distribution functions with the notation P(X = x).
Probability distribution functions return the probability that a
variable takes a specific value. With continuous random variables,
we also have probability density functions, which describe the
relative likelihood of observing any outcome within a continuous
range and that integrate over an interval to give a probability.
When we have specific cases where discrete or continuous
parameterizations matter, we’ll call them out and use p(X = x) to
denote a probability density function. However, in this book, we’ll
focus on framing our causal questions independently of whether
we’re in a discrete or continuous setting. We’ll stick mostly to the
probability distribution function notation P(X = x), but keep in
mind that the causal ideas work in the continuous case as well.
There are other canonical distribution classes appropriate for
continuous, bounded, or unbounded sets of variables. For example,
the normal (Gaussian) distribution class illustrates the famous “bell
curve.” I use the term “class” (or, perhaps more ideally, “type”) in
the computer science sense because the distribution isn’t realized
until we assign our Greek-lettered parameters. For a normal
(Gaussian) distribution class, the probability density function is
Here, μ and σ are the parameters.
Figure 2.10 is a popular figure that illustrates several commonly
used canonical distributions. The arrows between the distributions
highlight relationships between the distributions (e.g., Bernoulli is a
special case of the binomial distribution) that we won’t dive into
here.

Figure 2.10 A popular common set of canonical probability distributions. The
edges capture mathematical relationships between the distributions (that we
won’t get into here). Light-colored distributions are discrete and dark-colored
distributions are continuous. An arrow represents the existence of a
transformation that converts one distribution to another.
TYPES OF PARAMETERS
In probabilistic modeling settings, it is useful to have an intuition for
how to interpret canonical parameters. To that end, think of the
probability in a distribution as a scarce resource that must be
shared across all the possible outcomes. Some outcomes may get
more than others, but at the end of the day, it all must sum or

integrate to 1. Parameters characterize how the finite probability is
distributed to the outcomes.
As an analogy, we’ll use a city with a fixed population. The
parameters of the city determine where that population is situated.
Location parameters, such as the normal distribution’s “μ” (μ is the
mean of the normal, but not all location parameters are means),
are like the pin that drops down when you search the city’s name in
Google Maps. The pin characterizes a precise point we might call
the “city center.” In some cities, most of the people live near the
city center, and it gets less populated the further away from the
center you go. But in other cities, other non-central parts of the city
are densely populated. Scale parameters, like the normal’s “σ” (σ is
the standard deviation of a normal distribution, but not all scale
parameters are standard deviation parameters), determine the
spread of the population; Los Angeles has a high scale parameter. A
shape parameter (and its inverse, the rate parameter) affects the
shape of a distribution in a manner that does not simply shift it (as
a location parameter does) or stretch or shrink it (as a scale
parameter does). As an example, think of the skewed shape of
Hong Kong, which has a densely packed collection of skyscrapers in
the downtown area, while the more residential Kowloon has shorter
buildings spread over a wider space.
The Pyro library provides canonical distributions as modeling
primitives. The Pyro analog to a discrete categorical distribution
table is a Categorical object.
Listing 2.3 Canonical parameters in Pyro
import torch
from pyro.distributions import Bernoulli, Categorical, Gamma, Normal    #1
print(Categorical(probs=torch.tensor([.45, .30, .25])))    #2
print(Normal(loc=0.0, scale=1.0))
print(Bernoulli(probs=0.4))
print(Gamma(concentration=1.0, rate=2.0))
#1 Pyro includes the commonly used canonical distributions.
#2 The Categorical distribution takes a list of probability values, each value
corresponding to an outcome.
This prints the following representations of the distribution objects:

Categorical(probs: torch.Size([3]))
Normal(loc: 0.0, scale: 1.0)
Bernoulli(probs: 0.4000)
Gamma(concentration: 1.0, rate: 2.0)
Rather than providing a probability value, the log_prob method will
provide the natural log of the probability value, because log
probabilities have computational advantages over regular
probabilities. Exponentiating (taking e l where l is the log
probability) converts back to the probability scale. For example, we
can create a Bernoulli distribution object with a parameter value of
0.4.
bern = Bernoulli(0.4)
That distribution assigns a 0.4 probability to the value 1.0. For
numerical reasons, we typically work with the natural log of
probability values.
We can use the exp function in the math library to convert from log
probability back to the probability scale:
lprob = bern.log_prob(torch.tensor(1.0))
import math
print(math.exp(lprob))
Exponentiating the log probability returns the following probability
value:
0.3999999887335489
It is close, but not the same as 0.4 due to rounding error associated
with floating-point precision in computer calculations.
CONDITIONAL PROBABILITY WITH CANONICAL
DISTRIBUTIONS
There are few canonical distributions commonly used to
characterize sets of individual random variables, such as random
vectors or matrices. However, we can use the chain rule to factor a
joint probability distribution into conditional distributions that we
can represent with canonical distributions. For example, we could

represent Y conditioned on X and Z with the following normal
distribution,
where the location parameter μ(x,z) is a function of x and z. An
example is the following linear function:
Other functions, such as neural networks, are possible as well.
These β parameters are typically called weight parameters in
machine learning.
2.1.8 Visualizing distributions
In probabilistic modeling and Bayesian inference settings, we
commonly conceptualize distributions in terms of visuals. In the
discrete case, a common visualization is the bar plot. For example,
we can visualize the probabilities in figure 2.3 as the bar plot in
figure 2.11. Note that this is not a histogram; I’ll highlight the
distinction in section 2.3.

Figure 2.11 Visualization of a discrete probability distribution. The outcomes in
the distribution are on the horizontal axis, and probability is on the vertical
axis.
We still use visualizations when the distribution has a non-finite set
of outcomes. For example, figure 2.12 overlays two distributions
functions: a discrete Poisson distribution and a continuous normal
(Gaussian) distribution (I specified the two distributions in such a
way that they overlapped). The discrete Poisson has no upper
bound on outcomes (its lower bound is 0), but the probability tapers
off for higher numbers, resulting in smaller and smaller bars until
the bar becomes too infinitesimally small to draw. We visualize the
normal distribution by simply drawing the probability distribution
function as a curve in the figure. The normal has no lower or upper
bound, but the further away you get from the center, the smaller
the probability values get.

Figure 2.12 A continuous normal distribution (solid line) approximates a
discrete Poisson distribution (gray bars). Again, the outcomes are on the
horizontal axis, and the probability values are on the vertical axis.
Visualizing conditional probability distributions involves mapping
each conditioning variable to some element in the image. For
example, in figure 2.13, X is discrete, and Y conditioned on X has a
normal distribution where the location parameter is a function of X.
Figure 2.13 A visualization of the conditional probability distribution of
continuous Y, given discrete X. For different values of X, we get a different
distribution of Y.
Since X is discrete, it is simplest to map X to color and overlay the
curves for P(Y  |X = 1), P (Y  |X = 2), and P (Y  |X = 3). However, if we

wanted to visualize P(Y  |X, Z), we’d need to map Z to an aesthetic
element other than color, such as a third axis in a pseudo-3D image
or rows in a grid of images. But there is only so much information
we can add to a 2D visualization. Fortunately, conditional
independence helps us reduce the number of conditioning
variables.
2.1.9 Independence and conditional independence
Two random variables are independent if, informally speaking,
observing an outcome of one random variable does not affect the
probability of outcomes for the other variable, i.e., P (y |x) = P (y ).
We denote this as X ⊥ Y. If two variables are not independent, they
are dependent.
Two dependent variables can become conditionally independent
given other variables. For example, X ⊥ Y | Z means that X and Y
may be dependent, but they are conditionally independent given Z.
In other words, if X and Y are dependent, and X ⊥ Y | Z, then it is
not true that P (y |x) ≠ P(y) but it is true that P (y |x, z) = P (y |z).
INDEPENDENCE IS A POWERFUL TOOL FOR SIMPLIFICATION
Independence is a powerful tool for simplifying representations of
probability distributions. Consider a joint probability distribution P 
(W, X, Y, Z ) represented as a table. The number of cells in the table
would be the product of the number of possible outcomes each for
W, X, Y, and Z. We could use the chain rule to break the problem up
into factors {P (W  ), P(X  |W  ), P(Y  |X, W  ), P(Z  |Y, X, W  )}, but the
total number of parameters across these factors wouldn’t change,
so the aggregate complexity would be the same.
However, what if X ⊥ W   ? Then P (X  |W ) reduces to P(X ). What if Z
⊥ Y  |X  ? Then P (Z  |Y, X, W ) reduces to P (Z  |X, W ). Every time we
can impose a pairwise conditional independence condition as a
constraint on the joint probability distribution, we can reduce the
complexity of the distribution by a large amount. Indeed, much of
model building and evaluation in statistical modeling, regularization
in machine learning, and deep learning techniques such as “drop-
out” are either direct or implicit attempts to impose conditional

independence on the joint probability distribution underlying the
data.
CONDITIONAL INDEPENDENCE AND CAUSALITY
Conditional independence is fundamental to causal modeling.
Causal relationships lead to conditional independence between
correlated variables. For example, a child’s parents’ and
grandparents’ blood types are all causes of that child’s blood type;
these blood types are all correlated. But all you need is the parents’
blood type, the direct causes, to fully determine the child’s blood
type, as illustrated in figure 2.14. In probabilistic terms, the child’s
and grandparents’ blood types are conditionally independent, given
the parents.
Figure 2.14 How causality can induce conditional independence. The blood
types of the parents cause the blood type of the child. The grandfather’s blood
type is correlated with that of the child’s (dashed line). But the parents’ blood
types are direct causes that fully determine that of the child. These direct
causes render the child’s and grandfather’s blood types conditionally
independent.
The fact that causality induces conditional independence allows us
to learn and validate causal models against evidence of conditional

independence. In chapter 4, we’ll explore the relationship between
conditional independence and causality in formal terms.
2.1.10 Expected value
The expected value of a function of a random variable is the
weighted average of the function’s possible output values, where
the weight is the probability of that outcome.
In the case of a continuum of possible outcomes, the expectation is
defined by integration.
Some of the causal quantities we’ll be interested in calculating will
be defined in terms of expectation. Those quantities only reason
about the expectation, not about how the expectation is calculated.
It is easier to get an intuition for a problem when working with the
basic arithmetic of discrete expectation rather than integral
calculus in the continuous case. So, in this book, when there is a
choice, I use examples with discrete random variables and discrete
expectation. The causal logic in those examples all generalize to
the continuous case.
There are many interesting mathematical properties of expectation.
In this book, we care about the fact that conditional expectations
simplify under conditional independence: If X ⊥ Y, then E (X  |Y  ) =
E (X ). If X ⊥ Y  |Z, then E (X  |Y,Z ) = E (X  |Z ). In simpler terms, if two
variables (X and Y ) are independent, our expectation for one does

not change with information about the other. If their independence
holds conditional on a third variable (Z  ), our expectation for one,
given that we know the third variable, is unaffected by information
about the other variable.
Other than this, the most important property is the linearity of the
expectation, meaning that the expectation passes through linear
functions. Here are some useful reference examples of the linearity
of expectation:
For random variables X and Y: E (X + Y  ) = E (X  ) + E (Y  ) and
For constants a and b: E (aX + b ) = aE (X  ) + b
If X only has outcomes 0 and 1, and E(Y|X) = aX + b, then E 
(Y  |X = 1) – E (Y  |X = 0) = a. (This is true because a*1 + b – (a * 
0 + b) = a. Spoiler alert: this one is important for linear
regression-based causal effect inference techniques.)
The mean of the random variable’s distribution is the expected
value of the variable itself, as in E(X) (i.e., the function is the
identity function, f (X  ) = X ). In several canonical distributions, the
mean is a simple function of the parameters. In some cases, such
as in the normal distribution, the location parameter is equivalent
to the expectation. But the location parameter and the expectation
are not always the same. For example, the Cauchy distribution has
a location parameter, but its mean is undefined.
In the next section, you’ll learn how to represent distributions and
calculate expectations using computational methods.
2.2 Computational probability
We need to code probability distributions and expectations from
probability to use them in our models. In the previous section, you
saw how to code up a probability distribution for a three-sided die.
But how do we code up rolling a three-sided die? How do we write
code representing two dice rolls that are conditionally independent?

While we’re at it, how do we get a computer to do the math that
calculates an expectation? How do we get a computer, where
everything is deterministic, to roll dice so that the outcome is
unknown beforehand?
2.2.1 The physical interpretation of probability
Suppose I have a three-sided die. I have some probability values
assigned to each outcome on the die. What do those probability
values mean? How do I interpret them?
Suppose I repeatedly rolled the die and kept a running tally of how
many times I saw each outcome. First, the roll is random, meaning
that although I roll it the same way each time, I get varying results.
The physical shape of the die affects those tallies; if one face of the
die is larger than the other two, that size difference will affect the
count. As I repeat the roll many times, the proportion of total times
I see a given outcome converges to a number. Suppose I use that
number for my probability value. Further, suppose I interpret that
number as the “chance” of seeing that outcome each time I roll.
This idea is called physical (or frequentist) probability. Physical
probability means imagining some repeatable physical random
process that results in one outcome among a set of possible
outcomes. We assign a probability value using the convergent
proportion of times the outcome appears when we repeat the
random process ad infinitum. We then interpret that probability as
the propensity for that physical process to produce that outcome.
2.2.2 Random generation
Given the preceding definition for physical probability, we can
define random generation. In random generation, an algorithm
randomly chooses an outcome from a given distribution. The
algorithm’s choice is inspired by physical probability; the way it
selects an outcome is such that if we ran the algorithm ad
infinitum, the proportion of times it would choose that outcome
would equal the distribution’s probability value for that outcome.

Computers are deterministic machines. If we repeatedly run a
computer procedure on the same input, it will always return the
same output; it cannot produce anything genuinely random (unless
it has a random input). Computers have to use deterministic
algorithms to emulate random generation. These algorithms are
called pseudo-random number generators—they take a starting
number, called a random seed, and return a deterministic series of
numbers. Those algorithms mathematically guarantee that a series
of numbers is statistically indistinguishable from the ideal of
random generation.
In notation, I write random generation as follows:
This reads as “x is generated from the probability distribution of X.”
In random generation, synonyms for “generate” include “simulate”
and “sample.” For example, in pgmpy the sample method in
DiscreteFactor does random generation. It returns a pandas
DataFrame. Note that since this is random generation, you will
likely get different outputs when you run this code:
Listing 2.4 Simulating random variates from DiscreteFactor in pgmpy
from pgmpy.factors.discrete import DiscreteFactor
dist = DiscreteFactor(
    variables=["X"],
    cardinality=[3],
    values=[.45, .30, .25],
    state_names= {'X': ['1', '2', '3']}
)
dist.sample(n=1)    #1
#1 n is the number of instances you wish to generate.
This produces the table pictured in figure 2.15.

Figure 2.15 Generating one instance from P(X) creates a pandas DataFrame object
with one row.
We can also generate from joint probability distributions.
joint = DiscreteFactor(
    variables=['X', 'Y'],
    cardinality=[3, 2],
    values=[.25, .20, .20, .10, .15, .10],
    state_names= {
        'X': ['1', '2', '3'],
        'Y': ['0', '1']
    }
)
joint.sample(n=1)
This produces the table pictured in figure 2.16.

Figure 2.16 Generating one instance from P(X, Y) creates a pandas DataFrame
object with one row.
Pyro also has a sample method for canonical distributions:
import torch
from pyro.distributions import Categorical
Categorical(probs=torch.tensor([.45, .30, .25])).sample()
This generates a sample from that categorical distribution, i.e.,
either 0, 1, or 2.
tensor(1.)
2.2.3 Coding random processes
We can write our own random processes as code when we want to
generate values in a particular way. A random process written as
code is sometimes called a stochastic function, probabilistic
subroutine, or probabilistic program. For example, consider the joint
probability distribution P (X, Y, Z ). How can we randomly generate
from this joint distribution? Unfortunately, software libraries don’t
usually provide pseudo-random generation for arbitrary joint
distributions.

We can get around this by applying the chain rule and, if it exists,
conditional independence. For example, we could factorize as
follows:
Suppose that Y is conditionally independent of Z given X, then:
Finally, suppose we can sample from P (Z  ), P (X  |Z), and P (Y  |X)
given the basic random generation functions in our software library.
Then we can use this factorization to compose an algorithm for
sampling:
This is a random process that we can execute in code. First, we
generate a Z-outcome z from P (Z  ). We then condition X on that z,
and generate an X-outcome x. We do the same to generate a Y-
outcome y. Finally, this procedure generates a tuple {x, y, z} from
the joint distribution P (X, Y, Z  ).
In pgmpy, we can create a random process using the class called
BayesianNetwork.

Listing 2.5 Creating a random process in pgmpy and Pyro
from pgmpy.factors.discrete.CPD import TabularCPD
from pgmpy.models import BayesianNetwork
from pgmpy.sampling import BayesianModelSampling
PZ = TabularCPD(     #1
    variable='Z',     #1
    variable_card=2,     #1
    values=[[.65], [.35]],     #1
    state_names = {     #1
        'Z': ['0', '1']     #1
    })     #1
PXgivenZ = TabularCPD(     #2
    variable='X',    #2
    variable_card=2,   #2
    values=[   #2
        [.8, .6],   #2
        [.2, .4],   #2
    ],    #2
    evidence=['Z'],    #2
    evidence_card=[2],  #2
    state_names = {    #2
        'X': ['0', '1'],    #2
        'Z': ['0', '1'] #2
    })   #2
PYgivenX = TabularCPD(     #3
    variable='Y',     #3
    variable_card=3,     #3
    values=[    #3
        [.1, .8],     #3
        [.2, .1],     #3
        [.7, .1],    #3
    ],    #3
    evidence=['X'],     #3
    evidence_card=[2],    #3
    state_names = {    #3
        'Y': ['1', '2', '3'],    #3
        'X': ['0', '1']    #3
    })    #3
model = BayesianNetwork([('Z', 'X'), ('X', 'Y')])   #4
model.add_cpds(PZ, PXgivenZ, PYgivenX)     #5
generator = BayesianModelSampling(model)    #6
generator.forward_sample(size=1)    #7
#1 P(Z)
#2 P(X|Z=z)
#3 P(X|Z=z)
#4 P(Y|X=x)
#5 Create a BayesianNetwork object. The arguments are edges of a directed
graph, which we’ll cover in chapter 3.
#6 Add the conditional probability distributions to the model.
#7 Create a BayesianModelSampling object from the BayesianNetwork object.
#8 Sample from the resulting object
This produces one row in a pandas DataFrame, shown in figure
2.17.

Figure 2.17 The forward_sample method simulates one instance of X, Y, and Z as a
row in a pandas DataFrame.
Implementing random processes for random generation is powerful
because it allows generating from joint distributions that we can’t
represent in clear mathematical terms or as a single canonical
distribution. For example, while pgmpy works well with categorical
distributions, Pyro gives us the flexibility of working with
combinations of canonical distributions.
The following listing shows a Pyro version of the previous random
process. It has the same dependence between Z, X, and Y, but
different canonical distributions.
Listing 2.6 Working with combinations of canonical distributions in Pyro
import torch
from pyro.distributions import Bernoulli, Poisson, Gamma
z = Gamma(7.5, 1.0).sample()    #1
x = Poisson(z).sample()    #2
y = Bernoulli(x / (5+x)).sample()   #3
print(z, x, y)
#1 Represent P(Z) with a gamma distribution, and sample z.
#2 Represent P(X|Z=z) with a Poisson distribution with location parameter z,
and sample x.
#3 Represent P(Y|X=x) with a Bernoulli distribution. The probability parameter
is a function of x.

This prints out a sample set, such as the following:
tensor(7.1545) tensor(5.) tensor(1.)
Z comes from a gamma distribution, X from a Poisson distribution
with mean parameter set to z, and Y from a Bernoulli distribution
with its parameter set to a function of x.
Implementing a random function with a programming language lets
us use nuanced conditional control flow. Consider the following
pseudocode:
z ~ P(Z)
x ~ P(X|Z=z)
y = 0
for i in range(0, x){     #1
    y_i ~ P(Y|X=x)    #1
    y += y_i     #2
}
#1 We can use control flow, like this for loop, to generate values.
#2 y is the sum of the values generated in the for loop. y still depends on x, but
through nuanced control flow.
Here, y is still dependent on x. However, it is defined as the sum of
x individual random components. In Pyro, we might implement this
as follows.
Listing 2.7 Random processes with nuanced control flow in Pyro
import torch
from pyro.distributions import Bernoulli, Poisson, Gamma
z = Gamma(7.5, 1.0).sample()
x = Poisson(z).sample()
y = torch.tensor(0.0)    #1
for i in range(int(x)):     #1
    y += Bernoulli(.5).sample()     #1
print(z, x, y)
#1 y is defined as a sum of random coin flips, so y is generated from P(Y|X=x)
because the number of flips depends on x.
In Pyro, best practice is to implement random processes as
functions. Further, use the function pyro.sample to generate, rather
than using the sample method on distribution objects. We could
rewrite the preceding random_process code (listing 2.7) as follows.

Listing 2.8 Using functions for random processes and pyro.sample
import torch
import pyro
def random_process():
    z = pyro.sample("z", Gamma(7.5, 1.0))
    x = pyro.sample("x", Poisson(z))
    y = torch.tensor(0.0)
    for i in range(int(x)):
        y += pyro.sample(f"y{i}", Bernoulli(.5))    #1
    return y
#1 f"y{i}" creates the names "y1", "y2", etc.
The first argument in pyro.sample is a string that assigns a name to
the variable you are sampling. The reason for that will become
apparent when we start running inference algorithms in Pyro in
chapter 3.
2.2.4 Monte Carlo simulation and expectation
Monte Carlo algorithms use random generation to estimate
expectations from a distribution of interest. The idea is simple. You
have some way of generating from P (X  ). If you want E(X  ),
generate multiple x’s, and take the average of those x’s. If you
want E (f (X  )), generate multiple x’s and apply the function f (.) to
each of those x’s, and take the average. Monte Carlo works even in
cases when X is continuous.
In pgmpy, you use the sample or forward_sample methods to generate
a pandas DataFrame. You can then calculate the panda’s mean
method.
generated_samples = generator.forward_sample(size=100)
generated_samples['Y'].apply(int).mean()
In Pyro, we call the random_process function repeatedly. We can do
this for the preceding Pyro generator with a for loop that generates
100 samples:
generated_samples = torch.stack([random_process() for _ in range(100)])
This code repeatedly calls random_process in a Python list
comprehension. Recall that Pyro extends PyTorch, and the value of
y it returns is a tensor. I use torch.stack to turn this list of tensors
into a single tensor. Finally, I call the mean method on the tensor to
obtain the Monte Carlo estimate of E (Y  ).

generated_samples.mean()
When I ran this code, I got a value of about 3.78, but you’ll likely
get something slightly different.
Most things you’d want to know about a distribution can be framed
in terms of some function f (X  ). For example, if you wanted to know
the probability of X being greater than 10, you could simply
generate a bunch of x’s and convert each x to 1 if it is greater than
10 and 0 otherwise. Then you’d take the average of the 1’s and 0’s,
and the resulting value would estimate the desired probability.
To illustrate, the following code extends the previous block to
calculate E(Y  2).
torch.square(generated_samples).mean()
When calculating E(f (X  )) for a random variable X, remember to get
the Monte Carlo estimate by applying the function to the samples
first, and then take the average. If you apply the function to the
sample average, you’ll instead get an estimate of f (E (X  )), which is
almost always different.
2.2.5 Programming probabilistic inference
Suppose we implement in code a random process that generates an
outcome {x, y, z} from P (X, Y, Z  ) as follows:
Further, suppose we are interested in generating from P (Z  |Y = 3).
How might we do this? Our process can sample from P (Z  ), P 
(X  |Z  ), and P (Y  |Z  ), but it is not clear how we go from these to P 
(Z  |Y  ).
Probabilistic inference algorithms generally take an outcome-
generating random process and some target distribution as inputs.
Then, they return a means of generating from that target
distribution. This class of algorithms is often called Bayesian

inference algorithms because the algorithms often use Bayes rule
to go from P (Y  |Z ) to P (Z  |Y  ). However, the connection to Bayes
rule is not always explicit, so I prefer “probabilistic inference” over
“Bayesian inference algorithms.”
For example, a simple class of probabilistic inference algorithms is
called accept/reject algorithms. Applying a simple accept/reject
technique to generating from P (Z  |Y = 3) works as follows:
1. Repeatedly generate {x, y, z} using our generator for P (X, Y,
Z  ).
2. Throw away any generated outcome where y is not equal to 3.
3. The resulting set of outcomes for Z will have the distribution P 
(Z  |Y = 3).
Illustrating with Pyro, let’s rewrite the previous random_process
function to return z and y. After that, we’ll obtain a Monte Carlo
estimate of E (Z  |Y = 3).
Listing 2.9 Monte Carlo estimation in Pyro
import torch
import pyro
from pyro.distributions import Bernoulli, Gamma, Poisson
def random_process():
    z = pyro.sample("z", Gamma(7.5, 1.0))
    x = pyro.sample("x", Poisson(z))
    y = torch.tensor(0.0)
    for i in range(int(x)):
        y += pyro.sample(f"{i}", Bernoulli(.5))
    return z, y    #1
generated_samples = [random_process() for _ in range(1000)]     #2
z_mean = torch.stack([z for z, _ in generated_samples]).mean()     #3
print(z_mean)
#1 This new version of random_process returns both z and y.
#2 Generate 1000 instances of z and y using a list comprehension.
#3 Turn the individual z tensors into a single tensor, and then calculate the
Monte Carlo estimate via the mean method.
This code estimates E(Z  ). Since Z is simulated from a gamma
distribution, the true mean E (Z  ) is the shape parameter 7.5
divided by the rate parameter 1.0, which is 7.5.

Now, to estimate E (Z  |Y=3), we’ll filter the samples and keep only
the samples where Y is 3.
z_given_y = torch.stack([z for z, y in generated_samples if y == 3])
print(z_given_y.mean())
One run of this code produced tensor(6.9088), but your result might
be slightly different. That probabilistic inference algorithm works
well if the outcome Y=3 occurs frequently. If that outcome were
rare, the algorithm would be inefficient: we’d have to generate
many samples to get samples that meet the condition, and we’d be
throwing away many samples.
There are various other algorithms for probabilistic inference, but
the topic is too rich and tangential to causal modeling for us to
explore in depth. Nevertheless, the following algorithms are worth
mentioning for what we cover in this book. Visit
https://www.altdeep.ai/p/causalaibook for links to some
complementary materials on inference with pgmpy and Pyro.
PROBABILITY WEIGHTING METHODS
These methods generate outcomes from a joint probability
distribution and then weight them according to their probability in
the target distribution. We can then use the weights to do weighted
averaging via Monte Carlo estimation. Popular variants of this kind
of inference include importance sampling and inverse probability
reweighting, the latter of which is popular in causal inference and is
covered in chapter 11.
INFERENCE WITH PROBABILISTIC GRAPHICAL MODELS
Probabilistic graphical models use graphs to represent conditional
independence in a joint probability distribution. The presence of a
graph enables graph-based algorithms to power inference. Two
well-known approaches include variable elimination and belief
propagation. In figures 2.5 and 2.6, I showed that you could
“eliminate” a variable by summing over its columns or rows in the
probability table. Variable elimination uses the graph structure to
optimally sum over the variables you wish to eliminate until the
resulting table represents the target distribution. In contrast, belief

propagation is a message-passing system; the graph is used to
form different “cliques” of neighboring variables. For example, if P 
(Z  |Y = 1) is the target distribution, Y=1 is a message iteratively
passed back and forth between cliques. Each time a message is
received, parameters in the clique are updated, and the message is
passed on. Eventually, the algorithm converges, and we can derive
a new distribution for Z from those updated parameters.
One of the attractive features of graph-based probabilistic inference
is that users typically don’t implement them themselves; software
like pgmpy does it for you. There are theoretical caveats, but they
usually don’t matter in practice. This feature is an example of the
“commodification of inference” trend I highlighted in chapter 1. In
this book, we’ll work with causal graphical models, a special type of
probabilistic graphical model that works as a causal model. That
gives us the option of applying graph-based inference for causal
problems.
VARIATIONAL INFERENCE
In variational inference, we write code for a new stochastic process
that generates samples from an “approximating distribution” that
resembles the target distribution. That stochastic process has
parameters that we optimize using gradient-based techniques now
common in deep learning software. The objective function of the
optimization tries to minimize the difference between the
approximating distribution and the target distribution.
Pyro is a probabilistic modeling language that treats variational
inference as a principal inference technique. It calls the stochastic
process that generates from the approximating distribution a
“guide function,” and a savvy Pyro programmer gets good at
writing guide functions. However, it also provides a suite of tools for
“automatic guide generation,” another example of the
commodification of inference.
MARKOV CHAIN MONTE CARLO
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) is an inference algorithm popular
amongst computational Bayesians. These are accept/reject

algorithms where each newly generated outcome depends on the
previous (non-rejected) generated outcome. This produces a chain
of outcomes, and the distribution of outcomes in the chain
eventually converges to the target distribution. Hamiltonian Monte
Carlo (HMC) is a popular version that doesn’t require users to
implement the generator. Pyro, and similar libraries, such as PyMC,
implement HMC and other MCMC algorithms.
ADVANCED INFERENCE METHODS
Research in generative models continues to develop new inference
techniques. Examples include techniques such adversarial
inference, inference with normalizing flows, and diffusion-based
inference. The goal of such techniques are to efficiently sample
from the complex distributions common in machine learning
problems. Again, see https://www.altdeep.ai/p/causalaibook for
references. We’ll see an example of a structural causal model that
leverages normalizing flows in chapter 6. The approach taken in
this book is to leverage the “commodification of inference” trend
discussed in chapter 1, such that we can build causal models that
leverage these algorithms, as well as new algorithms as they are
released.
2.3 Data, populations, statistics, and
models
So far, we have talked about random variables and distributions.
Now we’ll move on to data and statistics. Let’s start with defining
some terms. You doubtless have an idea of what data is, but let’s
define it in terms we’ve already defined in this chapter. Data is a
set of recorded outcomes of a random variable or set of random
variables. A statistic is anything you calculate from data. For
example, when you train a neural network on training data, the
learned weight parameter values are statistics, and so are the
model’s predictions (since they depend on the training data via the
weights).
The real-world causal process that generates a particular stream of
data is called the data generating process (DGP). A model is a

simplified mathematical description of that process. A statistical
model is a model with parameters tuned such that the model aligns
with statistical patterns in the data.
This section presents some of the core concepts related to data and
statistics needed to make sense of this book.
2.3.1 Probability distributions as models for
populations
In applied statistics, we take statistical insights from data and
generalize them to a population. Consider, for example, the MNIST
digit classification problem described in chapter 1. Suppose the
goal of training a classification model on MNIST data was to deploy
the model in software that digitizes written text documents. In this
case, the population is all the digits on all the texts the software will
see in the future.
Populations are heterogeneous, meaning members of the
population vary. While a feature on a website might drive
engagement among the population of users, on average, the
feature might make some subpopulation of users less engaged, so
you would want to target the feature to the right subpopulations.
Marketers call this “segmentation.”
In another example, a medicine might not be much help on average
for a broad population of patients, but there some subpopulation
might experience benefits. Targeting those subpopulations is the
goal of the field of precision medicine.
In probabilistic models, we use probability distributions to model
populations. It is particularly useful to target subpopulations with
conditional probability. For example, suppose P (E  |F =True)
represents the distribution of engagement numbers among all
users exposed to a website feature. Then P (E  |F =True, G 
="millennial") represents the subpopulation of users exposed to the
feature who are also millennials.

CANONICAL DISTRIBUTIONS AND STOCHASTIC PROCESSES
AS MODELS OF POPULATIONS
If we use probability distributions to model populations, what
canonical distributions should we use for a given population? Figure
2.18 includes common distributions and the phenomena they
typically model.
Figure 2.18 Examples of common canonical distributions and the types of
phenomena and data they typically model
These choices don’t come from nowhere. The canonical
distributions are themselves derived from stochastic functions. For
example, the binomial distribution is the result of a process where
you do a series of coin flips. When something is the result of adding
together a bunch of independent (or weakly dependent) small
changes, you get a normal distribution. Waiting time distributions
capture the distribution of the amount of time one must wait for an

event (e.g., a device failure or a car accident). The exponential
distribution is appropriate for waiting times when the amount of
time you’ve already been waiting has no bearing on how much time
you still must wait (e.g., for the amount of time it takes a
radioactive atom to decay). If the time to event has an exponential
distribution, the number of times that event has occurred within a
fixed time period has a Poisson distribution.
A useful trick in probabilistic modeling is to think of the stochastic
process that created your target population. Then either choose the
appropriate canonical distribution or implement the stochastic
process in code using various canonical distributions as primitives
in the code logic. In this book, we’ll see that this line of reasoning
aligns well with causal modeling.
SAMPLING, IID, AND GENERATION
Usually, our data is not the whole population but a small subset
from the population. The act of randomly choosing an individual is
called sampling. When the data is created by repeatedly sampling
from the population, the resulting dataset is called a random
sample. If we can view data as a random sample, we call that data
independent and identically distributed (IID). That means that the
selection of each individual data point is identical in how it was
sampled, and each sampling occurred independently of the others,
and they all were sampled from the same population distribution.
Figure 2.19 illustrates how an IID random sample is selected from a
population.

Figure 2.19 Creating a random sample by random selection from a population.
Individuals are randomly selected from the population such that the sample
distribution resembles the population distribution. The sample is identically and
independently distributed (IID), meaning that sample members are selected the
same way, and whether an individual is selected doesn’t depend on whether
another individual was selected.
The idea of sampling and IID data illustrates the second benefit of
using probability distributions to model populations. We can use
generation from that distribution to model sampling from a
population. We can implement a stochastic process that represents
the DGP by first writing a stochastic process that represents the
population and then composing it with a process that generates
data from the population process, emulating IID sampling.
In pgmpy, this is as simple as generating more than one sample.
generator.forward_sample(size=10)
This produces the table showing in figure 2.20

Figure 2.20 A pandas DataFrame created by generating ten data points from a
model in pgmpy
The Pyro approach for IID sampling is pyro.plate.
Listing 2.10 Generating IID samples in Pyro
import pyro
from pyro.distributions import Bernoulli, Poisson, Gamma
def model():
    z = pyro.sample("z", Gamma(7.5, 1.0))
    x = pyro.sample("x", Poisson(z))
    with pyro.plate("IID", 10):     #1
        y = pyro.sample("y", Bernoulli(x / (5+x)))    #2
    return y
model()
#1 pyro.plate is a context manager for generating conditionally independent
samples. This instance of pyro.plate will generate 10 IIΔ samples.
#2 Calling pyro.sample generates a single outcome y, where y is a tensor of 10
IIΔ samples.
Using generation to model sampling is particularly useful in
machine learning, because often the data is not IID. In the MNIST
example in chapter 1, the original NIST data was not IID—one block
of data came from high school students and the other from
government officers. You could capture the identity of the digit

writer as a variable in your stochastic process. Then the data would
be IID conditional on that variable.
DON’T MISTAKE THE MAP FOR THE TERRAIN
Consider again the MNIST data. The population for that data is quite
nebulous and abstract. If that digit classification software were
licensed to multiple clients, the population would be a practically
unending stream of digits. Generalizing to abstract populations is
the common scenario in machine learning, as it is for statistics.
When R.A. Fisher, the founding father of modern statistics, was
designing experiments for testing soil types on crop growth at
Rothamsted Research, he was trying to figure out how to generalize
to the population of future crops (with as small a number of
samples as possible).
The problem with working with nebulously large populations is that
it can lead to the mistake of mentally conflating populations with
the probability distributions. Do not do this. Do not mistake the map
(the distribution used to model the population) for the terrain (the
population itself).
To illustrate, consider the following example: While writing part of
this chapter, I was vacationing in Silves, a town in the Portuguese
Algarve with a big castle, deep history, and great hiking. Suppose I
were interested in modeling the heights of Silves residents.
Officially, the population of Silves is 11,000, so let’s take that
number as ground truth. That means there are 11,000 different
height values in Silves. Suppose I physically went down to the
national health center in Silves and got a spreadsheet of every
resident’s height. Then the data I’d have is not a randomly sampled
subset of the population—it is the full population itself.
I could then compute a histogram on that population, as shown in
figure 2.21. A histogram is a visualization of the counts of values (in
this case, heights) in a population or sample. For continuous values
like heights, we count how many values fall into a range or “bin.”

Figure 2.21 A histogram illustrating the height distribution of all Silves
residents
This histogram represents the full population distribution. I can
make it look more like a probability distribution by dividing the
counts by the number of people, as in figure 2.22
Figure 2.22 Histogram of proportions of Silves residents with given height
One might say this distribution follows the normal (Gaussian)
probability distribution, because we see a bell curve, and indeed,
the normal is appropriate for evolutionary bell-shaped phenomena
such as height. But that statement is not precisely true. To see this,
consider that all normal distributions are defined for negative
numbers (though those numbers might have an infinitesimal
amount of probability density), whereas heights can’t be negative.
What we are really doing is using the normal distribution as a model
—as an approximation of this population distribution.
In another example, figure 2.23 shows the true distribution of the
parts of speech in Jane Austen’s novels. Note that this is not based
on a sample of pages from her novels; I created this visualization

from the parts-of-speech distribution of the 725 thousand words in
all her six completed novels.
Figure 2.23 Actual distribution of word types in all of Jane Austen’s novels
As modelers, we use canonical distributions to model the
population distribution, but the model is not equivalent to the
population distribution. This point may seem like trivial semantics,
but in the era of big data, we often can reason about an entire
population instead of just a random sample. For example, popular
online social networks have hundreds of millions and sometimes
billions of users. That’s a huge size, yet the entire population is just
one database query away.
In causal modeling, being precise in how we think about modeling
data and populations is extremely useful. Causal inferences are
about the real-world attributes of the population, rather than just
statistical trends in the data. And different causal questions we
want to answer will require us to bake different causal assumptions
into our models, some of which are stronger or harder to validate
than others.
2.3.2 From the observed data to the data generating
process
In causal modeling, it is important to understand how the observed
data maps back to the joint probability distribution of the variables

in the data, and how that joint probability distribution maps back to
the DGP. Most modelers have some level of intuition about the
relationships between these entities, but in causal modeling we
must be explicit. This explicit understanding is important because,
while in ordinary statistical modeling you model the joint
distribution (or elements of it), in causal modeling you need to
model the DGP.
FROM THE OBSERVED DATA TO THE EMPIRICAL JOINT
DISTRIBUTION
Suppose we had the dataset of five data points shown in table 2.1.
Table 2.1 A simple data set with five examples
jenny_throws_rock
brian_throws_rock
window_breaks
1
False
True
False
2
True
False
True
3
False
False
False
4
False
False
False
5
True
True
True
We can take counts of all the observed observable outcomes, as in
table 2.2.
Table 2.2 Empirical counts of each possible outcome combination
jenny_throws_rock
brian_throws_rock
window_breaks
counts
1
False
False
False
2
2
True
False
False
0
3
False
True
False
1
4
True
True
False
0
5
False
False
True
0
6
True
False
True
1
7
False
True
True
0
8
True
True
True
1
Dividing by the number of outcomes (5) gives us the empirical joint
distribution, shown in table 2.3.

Table 2.3 The empirical distribution of the data
jenny_throws_rock
brian_throws_rock
window_breaks
proportion
1
False
False
False
0.40
2
True
False
False
0.00
3
False
True
False
0.20
4
True
True
False
0.00
5
False
False
True
0.00
6
True
False
True
0.20
7
False
True
True
0.00
8
True
True
True
0.20
So, in the case of discrete outcomes, we go from the data to the
empirical distribution using counts.
In the continuous case, we could calculate a histogram or a density
curve or some other statistical representation of the empirical
distribution. There are different statistical choices you can make
about how you create those summaries, but these are
representations of the same underlying empirical distribution.
Importantly, the empirical joint distribution is not the actual joint
distribution of the variables in the data. For example, we see that
several outcomes in the empirical distribution never appeared in
those five data points. Is the probability of their occurrence zero?
More likely, the probabilities were greater than zero but we didn’t
see those outcomes, since only five points were sampled.
As an analogy, a fair die has a 1/6 probability of rolling a 1. If you
roll the die five times, you have a near (1–1/6)5=40% probability of
not seeing 1 in any of those rolls. If that happened to you, you
wouldn’t want to conclude that the probability of seeing a 1 is zero.
If, however, you kept rolling, the proportion of times you saw the 1
would converge to 1/6.
NOTE  More precisely, our frequentist interpretation of
probability tells us to interpret probability as the proportion of
times we get a 1 when we roll ad infinitum. Despite the “ad
infinitum,” we don’t have to roll many times before the
proportion starts converging to a number (1/6).

FROM THE EMPIRICAL JOINT DISTRIBUTION TO THE
OBSERVATIONAL JOINT DISTRIBUTION
The observational joint probability distribution is the true joint
distribution of the variables observed in the data. Let’s suppose
table 2.4 shows the true observational joint probability distribution
of these observed variables.
Table 2.4 Assume this is the true observational joint distribution.
jenny_throws_rock
brian_throws_rock
window_breaks
probability
1
False
False
False
0.25
2
True
False
False
0.15
3
False
True
False
0.15
4
True
True
False
0.05
5
False
False
True
0.00
6
True
False
True
0.10
7
False
True
True
0.10
8
True
True
True
0.20
Sampling from the joint observational distribution produces the
empirical joint distribution, as illustrated in figure 2.24.
Figure 2.24 Sampling from the observational joint distribution produces the
observed data and empirical distribution.
LATENT VARIABLES: FROM THE OBSERVED JOINT
DISTRIBUTION TO THE FULL JOINT DISTRIBUTION
In statistical modeling, latent variables are variables that are not
directly observed in the data but are included in the statistical

model. Going back to our data example, imagine there were a
fourth latent variable, “strength_of_impact”, shown in table 2.5.
Table 2.5 The values in the strength_of_impact column are unseen “latent”
variables.
jenny_throws_rock
brian_throws_rock
strength_of_impact
window_breaks
1
False
True
0.6
False
2
True
False
0.6
True
3
False
False
0.0
False
4
False
False
0.0
False
5
True
True
0.8
True
Latent variable models are common in disciplines ranging from
machine learning to econometrics to bioinformatics. For example, in
natural language processing, an example of a popular probabilistic
latent variable model is topic models, where the observed variables
represent the presence of words and phrases in a document, and
the latent variable represents the topic of the document (e.g.,
sports, politics, finance, etc.)
The latent variables are omitted from the observational joint
probability distribution because, as the name implies, they are not
observed. The joint probability distribution of both the observed
and the latent variables is the full joint distribution. To go from the
full joint distribution to the observational joint distribution, we
marginalize over the latent variables, as shown in figure 2.25.
Figure 2.25 Marginalizing the full joint distribution over the latent variables
produces the observational joint distribution.

FROM THE FULL JOINT DISTRIBUTION TO THE DATA
GENERATING PROCESS
I wrote the actual DGP for the five data points using the following
Python code.
Listing 2.11 An example of a DGP in code form
def true_dgp(jenny_inclination, brian_inclination, window_strength):     #1
    jenny_throws_rock = jenny_inclination > 0.5     #2
    brian_throws_rock = brian_inclination > 0.5    #2
    if jenny_throws_rock and brian_throws_rock:    #3
        strength_of_impact = 0.8   #3
    elif jenny_throws_rock or brian_throws_rock:     #4
        strength_of_impact = 0.6    #4
    else:     #5
        strength_of_impact = 0.0   #5
    window_breaks = window_strength < strength_of_impact    #6
    return jenny_throws_rock, brian_throws_rock, window_breaks
#1 Input variables reflect Jenny and Brian’s inclination to throw and the
window’s strength.
#2 Jenny and Brian throw the rock if so inclined.
#3 If both Jenny and Brian throw the rock, the total strength of the impact is .8.
#4 If either Jenny or Brian throws the rock, the total strength of the impact is
.6.
#5 Otherwise, no one throws and the strength of impact is 0.
#6 If the strength of impact is greater than the strength of the window, the
window breaks.
Note  In general, the DGP is unknown, and our models are
making guesses about its structure.
In this example, jenny_inclination, brian_inclination, and
window_strength are latent variables between 0 and 1.
jenny_inclination represents Jenny’s initial desire to throw,
brian_inclination represents Brian’s initial desire to throw, and
window_strength represents the strength of the window pane. These
are the initial conditions that lead to one instantiation of the
observed variables in the data: (jenny_throws_ball, brian_throws_ball,
window_breaks).
I then called the true_dgp function on the following five sets of latent
variables:

initials = [
    (0.6, 0.31, 0.83),
    (0.48, 0.53, 0.33),
    (0.66, 0.63, 0.75),
    (0.65, 0.66, 0.8),
    (0.48, 0.16, 0.27)
]
In other words, the following for loop in Python is the literal
sampling process producing the five data points:
data_points = []
for jenny_inclination, brian_inclination, window_strength in initials:    
    data_points.append(
        true_dgp(
            jenny_inclination, brian_inclination, window_strength
        )
    )
The DGP is the causal process that generated the data. Note the
narrative element that is utterly missing from the full joint
probability distribution; Jenny and Brian throw a rock at a window if
they are so inclined, and if they hit the window, the window may
break, depending on whether one or both of them threw rocks and
the strength of the window. The DGP entails the full joint probability
distribution, as shown in figure 2.26. In other words, the joint
probability distribution is a consequence of the DGP based on how
it generates data.
Figure 2.26 The DGP entails the full joint distribution.
In summary, the DGP entails the full joint distribution, and
marginalizing over the full joint distribution produces the

observational joint distribution. Sampling from that distribution
produces the observed data and the corresponding empirical joint
distribution. There is a many-to-one relationship as we move down
this hierarchy that has implications for causal modeling and
inference.
MANY-TO-ONE RELATIONSHIPS DOWN THE HIERARCHY
Figure 2.27 There is a many-to-one relationship as we move down the hierarchy.
In summary, there are multiple DGPs consistent with the observed data.
As we move down from the DGP to full joint to observational joint to
empirical joint distribution and observed data, there is a many-to-
one relationship from the preceding level to the subsequent level,
as illustrated in figure 2.27.
Similarly, an object at one of the levels is consistent with multiple
objects at the next level up:
There could be multiple observational joint distributions
consistent with the empirical joint distribution. If we sample five
points, then sample five more, we’ll get different datasets and
thus different empirical distributions.
There could be multiple full joint distributions consistent with
one observational joint distribution. The difference between the
two distributions is the latent variables. But what if we have
different choices for the sets of latent variables? For example, if
our observation distribution is P (X, Y  ), the full joint would be P 
(X, Y, Z, W) if our set of latent variables is {Z, W  }, or P (X, Y, Z,
V  ) if our set of latent variables is {Z, V  }.

There could be multiple DGP’s consistent with one full joint
probability distribution. Suppose in our window-breaking
example, Jenny had a friend Isabelle who sometimes egged
Jenny on to throw the rock and sometimes did not, affecting
Jenny’s inclination to throw. This DGP is different from the
original, but the relationship between the latent variable of
Isabell’s peer pressure and Jenny’s inclination to throw could be
such that this new DGP entailed exactly the same joint
probability distribution. As a more trivial example, suppose we
looked at the distribution of a single variable corresponding to
the sum of the roll of three dice. The DGP is rolling three dice
and then summing them together. Two DGPs could differ in
terms of the order of summing the dice; e.g., (first + second) +
third or (first + third) + second or (second + third) + first.
These would all yield the same distribution.
Those last two many-to-one relationships are fundamental to the
concept of causal identifiability, the core reason why causal
inference is hard. This concept is the reason “correlation does not
imply causation,” as the saying goes.
2.3.3 Statistical tests for independence
Causality imposes independence and conditional independence on
variables, so we rely on statistical tests for conditional
independence to build and validate causal models.
Suppose X and Y are independent, or X and Y are conditionally
independent given Z. If we have data observing X, Y, and Z, we can
run a statistical test for independence. The canonical statistical
independence procedure returns a test statistic that quantifies the
statistical association between X and Y, and a p-value that
quantifies the probability of getting that degree of association, or
one more extreme, by pure chance when X and Y are actually
conditionally independent given Z. Put simply, the test quantifies
the statistical evidence of dependence or independence.
Evidence suggesting that someone committed a murder is not the
same as the definitive truth that they did. Similarly, statistical
evidence indicating independence between two variables does not

equate to the actual fact of their independence. In both cases,
evidence can point toward a conclusion without definitively proving
it. For example, given that independence is true, the strength of the
statistical evidence can vary on several factors, such as how much
data there is. And it is always possible to make false conclusions
from these tests.
Remember that if X and Y are independent, then P (Y  |X  ) is
equivalent to P (Y  ). In predictive terms, that means X has no
predictive power on Y. If you can’t use classical statistical tests
(e.g., if X and Y are vectors) then you can try training a predictive
model and subjectively evaluating how well the model predicts.
2.3.4 Statistical estimation of model parameters
When we “train” or “fit” a model, we are attempting to estimate the
values of parameters of the model, such as the weights in a
regression model or neural network. Generally, in statistical
modeling and machine learning, the goal of parameter estimation is
modeling the observational or joint probability distribution. In
causal modeling, the objective is modeling the DGP. The distinction
is important for making good causal inferences.
ESTIMATING BY MAXIMIZING LIKELIHOOD
In informal terms and in the context of parameter estimation,
likelihood is the probability of having observed the data given a
candidate value of the parameter vector. Maximizing likelihood
means choosing the value of the parameter vector that has the
highest likelihood. Usually, we work with maximizing the log of the
likelihood instead of the likelihood directly because it is
mathematically and computationally easier to do so; the value that
maximizes likelihood is the same as the value that maximizes log-
likelihood. In special cases, such as linear regression, the maximum
likelihood estimate has a solution we can derive mathematically,
but in general, we must find the solution using numerical
optimization techniques. In some models, such as neural networks,
it is infeasible to find the value that maximizes likelihood, so we
settle for a candidate that has a relatively high likelihood.

ESTIMATING BY MINIMIZING OTHER LOSS FUNCTIONS AND
REGULARIZATION
In machine learning, there are a variety of loss functions for
estimating parameters. Maximizing likelihood is a special case of
minimizing a loss function, namely the negative log-likelihood loss
function.
Regularization is the practice of adding additional elements to the
loss function that steer the optimization toward better parameter
values. For example, L2 regularization adds a value proportional to
the sum of the square of the parameter values to the loss. Since a
small increase in value leads to a larger increase in the square of
the value, L2 regularization helps avoid exceedingly large
parameter estimates.
BAYESIAN ESTIMATION
Bayesian estimation treats parameters as random variables and
tries to model the conditional distribution of the parameters
(typically called the posterior distribution) given the observed
variables in the data. It does so by putting a “prior probability
distribution” on the parameters. The prior distribution has its own
parameters called “hyperparameters” that the modeler must
specify. When there are latent variables in the model, Bayesian
inference targets the joint distribution of the parameters and the
latent variables conditional on the observed variables.
As mentioned before, in this book I use Greek letters for parameters
and Roman letters for variables in the DGP, including latent
variables. But for a Bayesian statistician, the distinction is
irrelevant; both parameters and latent variables are unknown and
thus targets of inference.
One of the main advantages of Bayesian estimation is that rather
than getting a point value for the parameters, you get an entire
conditional probability distribution of the parameters (more
specifically, you get samples from or parameter values representing
that distribution). That probability distribution represents
uncertainty about the parameter values, and you can incorporate

that uncertainty into predictions or other inferences you make from
the model.
According to Bayesian philosophy, the prior distribution should
capture the modeler’s subjective beliefs about the true value of the
parameters. We’ll do something similar in causal modeling when we
turn our beliefs about the causal structure and mechanisms of the
DGP into causal assumptions in the model.
STATISTICAL AND COMPUTATIONAL ATTRIBUTES OF AN
ESTIMATOR
Given that there are many ways of estimating a parameter, let’s
look for ways to compare the quality of estimation methods.
Suppose the parameter we want to estimate had a ground truth
value. Statisticians think about how well an estimation method can
recover that true value. Specifically, they care about the bias and
consistency of an estimation method. An estimator is a random
variable because it comes from data (and data has a distribution),
which means an estimator has a distribution. An estimator is
unbiased if the mean of that distribution is equal to the true value
of the parameter it is estimating. Consistency means that the more
data you have, the closer the estimate is to the true value of the
parameter. In practice, the consistency of the estimator is more
important than whether it is unbiased.
Computer scientists know that while consistency is nice in theory,
getting an estimation method to work with “more data” is easier
said than done. They care about the computational qualities of an
estimator in relation to the amount of data. Does the estimator
scale with the data? Is it parallelizable? An estimator may be
consistent, but when its running on an iPhone app, will it converge
to the true value in milliseconds and not eat up the battery’s
charge in the process?
This book decouples understanding causal logic from the statistical
and computational properties of estimators of causal parameters.
We will focus on the causal logic and rely on libraries like DoWhy
that make the statistical and computational calculations easy to do.

GOODNESS-OF-FIT VS. CROSS-VALIDATION
When we estimate parameters, we can calculate various statistics
to tell us how well we’ve done. One class of statistics is called
goodness-of-fit statistics. Statisticians define goodness-of-fit as
statistics that quantify how well the model fits the data used to
train the model. Here’s another definition: goodness-of-fit statistics
tell you how well your model pretends to be the DGP for the data
you used to train your model. However, as we saw, there are
multiple possible DGPs for a given data set. Goodness-of-fit won’t
provide causal information that can distinguish the true DGP.
Cross-validation statistics generally indicate how well your model
predicts data it was not trained on. It is possible to have a model
with a decent goodness-of-fit relative to other models, but that still
predicts poorly. Machine learning is usually concerned with the task
of prediction and so favors cross-validation. However, a model can
be a good predictor and provide completely bogus causal
inferences.
2.4 Determinism and subjective
probability
This section will venture into the philosophical underpinnings we’ll
need for probabilistic causal modeling. In this book, we’ll use
probabilistic models to model causal models. When training the
model, we might want to use Bayesian parameter estimation
procedures. When doing causal inference, we might want to use a
probabilistic inference algorithm. When we do causal decision-
making, we might want to use Bayesian decision theory. Further,
structural causal models (chapter 6) have a rigid requirement on
where randomness can occur in the model. That means being clear
about the differences between Bayesianism, uncertainty,
randomness, probabilistic modeling, and probabilistic inference is
important.
The first key point is to view the DGP as deterministic. The second
key point is to view the probability in our models of the DGP as
subjective.

2.4.1 Determinism
The earlier code for the rock-throwing DGP is entirely deterministic;
given the initial conditions, the output is certain. Consider our
definition of physical probability again: if I throw a die, why is the
outcome random?
If I had a superhuman level of dexterity, perception, and mental
processing power, I could mentally calculate the die roll’s physics
and know the outcome with certainty. This philosophical idea of
determinism essentially says that the DGP is deterministic.
Eighteenth-century French scholar Pierre-Simon Laplace explained
determinism with a thought experiment called Laplace’s demon.
Laplace imagined some entity (the demon) that knew every atom’s
precise location and momentum in the universe. With that
knowledge, that entity would know the future state of the universe
with complete deterministic certainty because it could calculate
them from the laws of (Newtonian) mechanics. In other words,
given all the causes, the effect is 100% entirely determined and not
at all random.
To be clear, some systems, when we look closely enough, have
inherently stochastic elements (e.g., quantum mechanics,
biochemistry, etc.). However, this philosophical view of modeling
will apply to most things we’ll care to model.
2.4.2 Subjective probability
In our physical interpretation of probability, when I roll a die,
probability represents my lack of the demon’s superhuman
knowledge of the location and momentum of all the die’s particles
as it is rolling. In other words, when I build probability models of the
DGP, the probability reflects my lack of knowledge. This
philosophical idea is called subjective probability or Bayesian
probability. The argument goes beyond Bayes rule and Bayesian
statistical estimation to say that probability in the model represents
the modeler’s lack of complete knowledge about the DGP and does
not represent inherent randomness in the DGP.

Subjective probability expands our “random physical process”
interpretation of probability. The physical interpretation of
probability works well for simple physical processes like rolling a
die, flipping a coin, or shuffling a deck of cards. But, of course, we
will want to model many phenomena that are difficult to think of as
repeatable physical processes. For example, how the mind turns
thoughts into speech, or how an increased flow of fresh water into
the ocean due to climate change is threatening to tip the global
system of ocean currents. In these cases, we will still model these
phenomena using random generation. The probabilities used in the
random generation reflect that while we, as modelers, may know
some details about the data-generating process, we’ll never have
the superhuman deterministic level of detail.
Summary
A random variable is a variable whose possible values are
numerical outcomes of a random phenomenon.
A probability distribution function is a function that maps the
random variable outcomes to a probability value. A joint
probability distribution function maps each combination of X
and Y outcomes to a probability value.
We derive the chain rule, the law of total probability, and Bayes
rule from the fundamental axioms of probability. These are
useful rules in modeling.
A Markovian assumption means each variable in an ordering of
variables only depends on those that come directly before in
the order. This is a common simplifying assumption in statistical
modeling, but it plays a large role in causal modeling.
Canonical classes of distributions are mathematically well-
described representations of distributions. They provide us with
primitives that make probabilistic modeling flexible and
relatively easy.
Canonical 
distributions 
are 
instantiated 
with 
a 
set 
of
parameters, 
such 
as 
location, 
scale, 
rate, 
and 
shape
parameters.
When 
we 
build 
models, 
knowing 
what 
variables 
are
independent 
or 
conditionally 
independent 
dramatically

simplifies the model. In causal modeling, independence and
conditional independence will be vital in separating correlation
from causation.
The expected value of a random variable with a finite number
of outcomes is the weighted average of all possible outcomes,
where the weight is the probability of that outcome.
Probability is just a value. We need to give that value an
interpretation. The physical definition of probability maps
probability to the proportion of times an outcome would occur if
a physical process could be run repeatedly ad infinitum.
In contrast to the physical interpretation of probability, the
Bayesian view of subjective probability interprets probability in
terms of belief, or conversely, uncertainty.
When coding a random process, Pyro allows you to use
canonical distributions as primitives in constructing nuanced
random process models.
Monte Carlo algorithms use random generation to estimate
expectations from a distribution of interest.
Popular inference algorithms include graphical model-based
algorithms, probability weighting, MCMC, and variational
inference.
Canonical distributions and random processes can serve as
proxies for populations we wish to model and for which we want
to make inferences. Conditional probability is an excellent way
to model heterogeneous subpopulations.
Different canonical distributions are used to model different
phenomena, such as counts, bell curves, and waiting times.
Generating from random processes is a good model of real-life
sampling of independent and identically distributed data.
Given a dataset, multiple data generating processes (DGPs)
could have potentially generated that dataset. This fact
connects to the challenge of parsing causality from correlation.
Statistical independence tests validate independence and
conditional 
independence 
claims 
about 
the 
underlying
distribution.
There are several methods for learning model parameters,
including 
maximum 
likelihood 
estimation 
and 
Bayesian

estimation.
Determinism suggests that if we knew everything about a
system, we could predict its outcome with zero error. Subjective
probability is the idea that probability represents the modeler’s
lack of that complete knowledge about the system. Adopting
these philosophical perspectives will serve us in understanding
causal AI.
A great way to build models is to factorize a joint distribution,
simplify the factors with conditional independence, and then
implement factors as random processes.
A 
powerful 
modeling 
technique 
is 
to 
use 
probability
distributions to model populations, particularly when you care
about heterogeneity in those populations.
When we use probability distributions to model populations, we
can map generating from random processes to sampling from
the population.
While traditional statistical modeling models the observational
joint distribution or the full joint distribution, causal modeling
models the DGP.

Part 2 Building and
validating a causal graph
In part 2, we’ll focus on learning how to represent causal
relationships through causal graphs. We’ll also learn how to
validate those causal graphs with data, as well as combine
them with deep generative models. This part will equip you
with the skills to systematically construct causal structures
that represent real-world data generation processes and
validate those structures empirically.

3 Building a causal graphical
model
This chapter covers
Building a causal DAG to model a DGP
Using your causal graph as a communication, computation,
and reasoning tool
Building a causal DAG in pgmpy and Pyro
Training a probabilistic machine learning model using the
causal DAG as a scaffold
In this chapter, we’ll build our first models of the data generating
process (DGP) using the causal directed acyclic graph (causal
DAG)—a directed graph without cycles, where the edges
represent causal relationships. We’ll also look at how to train a
statistical model using the causal DAG as a scaffold.
3.1 Introducing the causal DAG
Let’s assume we can partition the DGP into a set of variables
where a given combination of variable values represents a
possible state of the DGP. Those variables may be discrete or
continuous. They can be univariate, or they can be multivariate
vectors or matrices.
A causal DAG is a directed graph where the nodes are this set of
variables and the directed edges represent the causal
relationships between them. When we use a causal DAG to
represent the DGP, we assume the edges reflect true causality in
the DGP.
To illustrate, recall the rock-throwing DGP from chapter 2. We
started with Jenny and Brian having a certain amount of

inclination to throw rocks at a window, which has a certain
amount of strength. If either person’s inclination to throw
surpasses a threshold, they throw. The window breaks depending
on whether either or both of them throw and the strength of the
window.
SETTING UP YOUR ENVIRONMENT
The code in this chapter was written with pgmpy version
0.1.24, pyro-ppl version 1.8.6, and DoWhy version 0.11.1.
Version 0.20.1 of Python’s Graphviz library was used to draw
an image of a DAG, and this depends on having the core
Graphviz software installed. Comment out the Graphviz code if
you would prefer not to set up Graphviz for now.
See the book’s notes at https://www.altdeep.ai/p/causalaibook
for links to the Jupyter notebooks with the code.
We’ll now create a causal DAG that will visualize this process. As
a Python function, the DGP is shown in the following listing.
Listing 3.1 DAG rock-throwing example
def true_dgp(jenny_inclination, brian_inclination, window_strength):     #1
    jenny_throws_rock = jenny_inclination > 0.5     #2
    brian_throws_rock = brian_inclination > 0.5   #2
    if jenny_throws_rock and brian_throws_rock:     #3
        strength_of_impact = 0.8    #3
    elif jenny_throws_rock or brian_throws_rock:     #4
        strength_of_impact = 0.6    #4
    else:     #5
        strength_of_impact = 0.0   #5
    window_breaks = window_strength < strength_of_impact     #6
    return jenny_throws_rock, brian_throws_rock, window_breaks
#1 Input variables are numbers between 0 and 1.
#2 Jenny and Brian throw the rock if so inclined.
#3 If both throw the rock, the strength of impact is .8.
#4 If one of them throws, the strength of impact is .6.
#5 If neither throws, the strength of impact is 0.
#6 The window breaks if the strength of impact is greater than the window
strength.
Figure 3.1 illustrates the rock-throwing DGP as a causal DAG.

In figure 3.1, each node corresponds to a random variable in the
DGP. The directed edges correspond to cause-effect relationships
(the source node is the cause and the target node is the effect).
Figure 3.1 A causal DAG representing the rock-throwing DGP. In this
example, each node corresponds to a random variable in the DGP.
3.1.1 Case study: A causal model for transportation
In this chapter, we’ll look at a model of people’s choice of
transportation on their daily commutes. This example will make
overly strong assumptions (to the point of being borderline
offensive) that will help illustrate the core ideas of model
building. You’ll find links to the accompanying code and tutorials
at https://www.altdeep.ai/p/causalaibook.
Suppose you were an urban planning consultant trying to model
the relationships between people’s demographic background,
the size of the city where they live, their job status, and their
decision on how to commute to work each day.

You could break down the key variables in the system as follows:
Age (A) —The age of an individual
Gender (S) —An individual’s reported gender (using “S”
instead of “G,” since “G” is usually reserved for DAGs)
Education (E) —The highest level of education or training
completed by an individual
Occupation (O) —An individual’s occupation
Residence (R) —The size of the city the individual resides in
Travel (T) —The means of transport favored by the individual
You could then think about the causal relationships between
these variables, using knowledge about the domain. Here is a
possible narrative:
Educational standards are different across generations. For
older people, a high school degree was sufficient to achieve
a middle-class lifestyle, but younger people need at least a
college degree to achieve the same lifestyle. Thus, age (A ) is
a cause of education (E  ).
Similarly, a person’s gender is often a factor in their decision
to pursue higher levels of education. So, gender (S ) is a
cause of education (E  ).
Many white-collar jobs require higher education. Many
credentialed professions (e.g., doctor, lawyer, or accountant)
certainly require higher education. So education (E  ) is a
cause of occupation (O ).
White-collar jobs that depend on higher levels of education
tend to cluster in urban areas. Thus, education (E) is a cause
of where people reside (R ).
People who are self-employed might work from home and
therefore don’t need to commute, while people with
employers do. Thus, occupation (O ) is a cause of
transportation (T  ).
People in big cities might find it more convenient to
commute by walking or using public transportation, while

people in small cities and towns rely on cars to get around.
Thus, residence (R  ) is a cause of transportation (T  ).
You could have created this narrative based on your knowledge
about the domain, or based on your research into the domain.
Alternatively, you could have consulted with a domain expert,
such as a social scientist who specializes in this area. Finally, you
could reduce this narrative to the causal DAG shown in figure
3.2.
Figure 3.2 A causal DAG representing a model of the causal factors behind
how people commute to work
You could build this causal DAG using the following code.

Listing 3.2 Building the transportation DAG in pgmpy
from pgmpy.models import BayesianNetwork
model = BayesianNetwork(    #1
       [
        ('A', 'E'),    #2
        ('S', 'E'),   #2
        ('E', 'O'),   #2
        ('E', 'R'),   #2
        ('O', 'T'),   #2
        ('R', 'T')    #2
     ]
)
#1 pgmpy provides a BayesianNetwork class where we add the edges to the
model.
#2 Input the ΔAG as a list of edges (tuples).
#3 Input the ΔAG as a list of edges (tuples).
The BayesianNetwork object in pgmpy is built on the DiGraph class
from NetworkX, the preeminent graph modeling library in
Python.

CAUSAL ABSTRACTION AND CAUSAL REPRESENTATION LEARNING
In modeling, the level of abstraction refers to the level of detail
and granularity of the variables in the model. In figure 3.2,
there is a mapping between the variables in the data and the
variables in the causal DAG, because the level of abstraction in
the data generated by the DGP and the level of abstraction of
the causal DAG are the same. But it is possible for variables in
the data to be at a different levels of abstraction. This is
particularly common in machine learning, where we often deal
with low-level features, such as pixels.
When the level of abstraction in the data is lower than the
level the modeler wants to work with, the modeler must use
domain knowledge to derive the high-level abstractions that
will appear as nodes in the DAG. For example, a doctor may be
interested in a high-level binary variable node like “Tumor
(present/absent),” while the data itself contains low-level
variables such as a matrix of pixels from medical imaging
technology.
That doctor must look at each image in the dataset and
manually label the high-level tumor variable. Alternatively, a
modeler can use analytical means (e.g., math or logic) to map
low-level abstractions to high-level ones. Further, they must do
so in a way that preserves causal assumptions about the DGP.
This task of creating high-level variables from lower-level ones
in a causally rigorous way is called causal abstraction. In
machine learning, the term “feature engineering” applies to
the task of computing useful high-level features from lower-
level features. Causal abstraction differs in that requirement
for causal rigor. You’ll find some sources for causal abstraction
information in the book’s notes at
https://www.altdeep.ai/p/causalaibook.
Another approach to learning high-level causal abstractions
from lower ones in data is to use deep learning—this is called

causal representation learning. We’ll touch briefly on this topic
in chapter 5.
3.1.2 Why use a causal DAG?
The causal DAG is the best-known representation of causality,
but to understand its value, it’s useful to think about other ways
of modeling causality. One alternative is using a mathematical
model, such as a set of ordinary differential equations or partial
differential equations, as is common in physics and engineering.
Another option is to use computational simulators, such as are
used in meteorology and climate science.
In contrast to those alternatives, a causal DAG requires a much
less mathematically detailed understanding of the DGP. A causal
DAG only requires you to specify what causes what, in the form
of a graph. Graphs are easy for humans to think about; they are
the go-to method for making sense of complicated domains.
Indeed, there are several benefits of using a causal DAG as a
representation of the DGP:
DAGs are useful in communicating and visualizing causal
assumptions.
We have many tools for computing over DAGs.
Causal DAGs represent time.
DAGs link causality to conditional independence.
DAGs can provide scaffolding for probabilistic ML models.
The parameters in those probabilistic ML models are modular
parameters, and they encode causal invariance.
Let’s review these benefits one at a time.

3.1.3 DAGs are useful in communicating and
visualizing causal assumptions
A causal DAG is a powerful communication device. Visual
communication of information involves highlighting important
information at the expense of other information. As an analogy,
consider the two maps of the London Underground in figure 3.3.
The map on the left is geographically accurate. The simpler map
on the right ignores the geographic detail and focuses on the
position of each station relative to other stations, which is,
arguably, all one needs to find their way around London.
Figure 3.3 Visual communication is a powerful use case for a graphical
representation. For instance, the map of the London Underground on the left
is geographically accurate, while the one on the right trades that accuracy
for a clear representation of each station’s position relative to the others.
The latter is more useful for train riders than the one with geographic
accuracy. Similarly, a causal DAG abstracts away much detail of the causal
mechanism to create a simple representation that is easy to reason about
visually.
Similarly, a causal DAG highlights causal relationships while
ignoring other things. For example, the rock-throwing DAG
ignores the if-then conditional logic of how Jenny and Brian’s
throws combined to break the window. The transportation DAG
says nothing about the types of variables we are dealing with.

Should we consider age (A ) in terms of continuous time, integer
years, categories like young/middle-aged/elderly, or intervals like
18–29, 30–44, 45–64, and >65? What are the categories of the
transportation variable (T  )? Could the occupation variable (O  )
be a multidimensional tuple like {employed, engineer, works-
from-home}? The DAG also fails to capture which of these
variables are observed in the data, and the number of data
points in that data.
CAUSAL DAGS DON’T ILLUSTRATE MECHANISM
A causal DAG also doesn’t visualize interactions between causes.
For example, in older generations, women were less likely to go
to college than men. In younger generations, the reverse is true.
While both age (A) and gender (S) are causes of education (E  ),
you can’t look at the DAG and see anything about how age and
gender interact to affect education.
More generally, DAGs can’t convey any information about the
causal mechanism or how the causes impact the effect. They
only establish the what of causality, as in what causes what.
Consider, for example, the various logic gates in figure 3.4. The
input binary values for A and B determine the output differently
depending on the type of logic gate. But if we represent a logic
gate as a causal DAG, then all the logic gates have the same
causal DAG. We can use the causal DAG as a scaffold for causal
graphical models that capture this logic, but we can’t see the
logic in the DAG.

Figure 3.4 The various kinds of logic gates all have the same causal DAG.
This is a strength and a weakness. A causal DAG simplifies
matters by communicating what causes what, but not how.
However, in some cases (such as logic gates), visualizing the
how would be desirable.
CAUSAL DAGS REPRESENT CAUSAL ASSUMPTIONS
A causal DAG represents the modeler’s assumptions and beliefs
about the DGP, because we don’t have access to that process
most of the time. Thus, a causal DAG allows us to visualize our
assumptions and communicate them to others.
Beyond this visualization and communication, the benefits of a
causal DAG are mathematical and computational (I’ll explain
these in the following subsections). Causal inference researchers
vary in their opinions on the degree to which these mathematical
and computational properties of causal DAGs are practically

beneficial. However, most agree on the fundamental benefit of
visualization and communication of causal assumptions.
The assumptions encoded in a causal DAG are strong. Let’s look
again at the transportation DAG from figure 3.2, shown again in
figure 3.5. Consider the alternatives to that DAG; how many
possible DAGs could we draw on this simple six-node system?
The answer is 3,781,503, so when we use a causal DAG to
communicate our assumptions about this system, we’re
communicating our top choice over 3,781,502 alternatives.
Figure 3.5 A causal DAG model of transportation choices. This DAG encodes
strong assumptions about how these variables do and do not relate to one
another.
And how about some of those competing DAGs? Some of them
seem plausible. Perhaps baby boomers prefer small-town life
while millennials prefer city life, implying that there should be an
A → R edge. Perhaps gender norms determine preferences and
opportunities in certain professions and industries, implying an S
→ O edge. The assumption that age and gender cause
occupation and residence only indirectly through education is a
powerful assumption that would provide useful inferences if it is
right.

But what if our causal DAG is wrong? It seems it is likely to be
wrong, given its 3,781,502 competitors. In chapter 4, we’ll use
data to show us when the causal assumptions in our chosen DAG
fail to hold.
3.1.4 We have many tools for computing over DAGs
Directed graphs are well-studied objects in math and in
computer science, where they are a fundamental data structure.
Computer scientists have used graph algorithms to solve many
practical problems with theoretical guarantees on how long they
will take to arrive at solutions. The programming languages
commonly used in data science and machine learning have
libraries that implement these algorithms, such as NetworkX in
Python. These popular libraries make it easier to write code that
works with causal DAGs.
We can bring all that theory and tooling to bear on a causal
modeling problem when we represent a causal model in the form
of a causal DAG. For example, in pgmpy we can train a causal
DAG on data to get a directed causal graphical model. Given that
model, we can apply algorithms for graph-based probabilistic
inference, such as belief propagation, to estimate conditional
probabilities defined on variables in the graph. The directed
graph structure enables these algorithms to work in typical
settings without our needing to configure them to a specific
problem or task.
In the next chapter, I’ll introduce the concept of d-separation,
which is a graphical abstraction for conditional independence
and the fundamental idea behind the do-calculus theory for
causal inference. D-separation is all about finding paths between
nodes in the directed graph, which is something any worthwhile
graph library makes easy by default. Indeed, conditional
independence is the key idea behind the third benefit of the
causal DAG.

3.1.5 Causal DAGs can represent time
The causal DAG has an implicit representation of time. In more
technical terms, the causal DAG provides a partial temporal
ordering because causes precede effects in time.
For example, consider the graph in figure 3.6. This graph
describes a DGP where a change in cloud cover (Cloudy) causes
both a change in the state of a weather-activated sprinkler
(Sprinkler) and the state of rain (Rain), and these both cause a
change in the state of the wetness of the grass (Wet Grass). We
know that a change in the state of the weather causes rain and
sprinkler activation, and that these both cause a change in the
state of the wetness of the grass. However, it is only a partial
temporal ordering, because the graph doesn’t tell us which
happens first: the sprinkler activation or the rain.
Figure 3.6 A causal DAG representing the state of some grass (wet or dry).
The DAG gives us a partial temporal ordering over its nodes because causes
precede effects in time.
The partial ordering in figure 3.6 may seem trivial, but consider
the DAG in figure 3.7. Visualization libraries can use the partial
ordering in the hairball-like DAG on the left of figure 3.7 to create
the much more readable form on the right.

Figure 3.7 A visualization library can use the DAG’s partial ordering to
unravel the hairball-like DAG on the left into the more readable form on the
right.
Sometimes we need a causal DAG to be more explicit about
time. For example, we may be modeling causality in a dynamic
setting, such as in the models used in reinforcement learning. In
this case, we can make time explicit by defining and labeling the
variables of the model, as in figure 3.8. We can represent
continuous time with interval variables like “Δ.” Chapter 12 will
provide some concrete examples.

Figure 3.8 If we need a causal DAG to be explicit about time, we can make
time explicit in the definition of the variables and labeling of their nodes. We
can represent continuous time with interval variables like “Δ.”
The causal DAG doesn’t allow for any cycles. In some causal
systems, relaxing the acyclicity constraint makes sense, such as
with systems that have feedback loops, and some advanced
causal models allow for cycles. But sticking to the simpler acyclic
assumption allows us to leverage the benefits of the causal DAG.
If you have cycles, sometimes you can unroll the cycle over time
and make the time explicit to get acyclicity. A graph X ⇄ Y can
unroll as X0→Y0 →X1→Y1 . . . . For example, you may have a cycle
between supply, price, and demand, but perhaps you could
rewrite this as price at time 0 affects supply and demand at time
1, which then affects price at time 2, etc.
3.1.6 DAGs link causality to conditional
independence
Another benefit of a causal DAG is that it allows us to use
causality to reason about conditional independence. Humans
have an innate ability to reason in terms of causality—that’s how
we get the first and second benefits of causal DAGs. But
reasoning probabilistically doesn’t come nearly as easily. As a
result, the ability to use causality to reason about conditional
independence (a concept from probability) is a considerable
feature of DAGs.

Figure 3.9 The causal relationships in the transportation DAG encode key
assumptions about conditional independence.
Consider the transportation DAG, displayed again in figure 3.9.
The six variables in the DAG have a joint distribution P 
(A,S,E,O,R,T  ). Recall the chain rule from chapter 2, which says
that we can factorize any joint probability into a chain of
conditional probability factors. For example,
The chaining works for any ordering of the variables. But instead
of choosing any ordering, we’ll choose the (partial) ordering of
the causal DAG, since that ordering aligns with our assumptions
of the causal flow of the variables in the DGP. Looking at figure
3.9, the ordering of variables is {(A, S  ), E, (O, R  ), T  }. The pairs
(A, S  ) and (O, R  ) are unordered. If we arbitrarily pick an
ordering, letting A come before S and O come before R, we get
this:

Next, we’ll use the causal DAG to further simplify this
factorization. Each factor is a conditional probability, so we’ll
simplify those factors by conditioning each node on only its
parents in the DAG. In other words, for each variable, we’ll look
at that variable’s direct parents in the graph, then we’ll drop
everything on the right side of the conditioning bar (|) that isn’t
one of those direct parents. If we condition only on parents, we
get the following simplification:
What is going on here? Why should the causal DAG magically
mean we can say P (s|a ) is equal to P (s ) and P (r|o,e,s,a)
simplifies to P (r |e )? As discussed in chapter 2, stating that P 
(s |a)= P (s ) and P (t |o,r,e,s,a)= P (t |o,r) is equivalent to saying
that S and A are independent, and T is conditionally independent
of E, S, and A, given O and R. In other words, the causal DAG
gives us a way to impose conditional independence constraints
over the joint probability distribution of the variables in the DGP.
Why should we care about things being conditionally
independent? Conditional independence makes life as a modeler
easier. For example, suppose you were to model the
transportation variable T with a predictive model. The predictive
model implied by P (t |o,r,e,s,a ) requires having features O, R, E,
S, and A, while the predictive model implied by P (t |o,r ) just
requires features O and R to predict T. The latter model will have
fewer parameters to learn, have more degrees of freedom, take
less space in memory, train faster, etc.
But why does a causal DAG give us the right to impose
conditional independence? Let’s build some intuition about the
connection between causality and conditional independence.
Consider the example of using genetic data from family
members to draw conclusions about an individual. For example,

the Golden State Killer was a California-based serial killer
captured using genetic genealogy. Investigators used DNA left by
the killer at crime scenes to identify genetic relatives in public
databases. They then triangulated from those relatives to find
the killer.
Suppose you had a close relative and a distant relative on the
same line of ancestry. Could the distant relative provide any
additional genetic information about you once we had already
accounted for that close relative? Let’s simplify a bit by focusing
just on blood type. Suppose the close relative was your father,
and the distant relative was your paternal grandfather, as in
figure 3.10. Indeed, your grandfather’s blood type is a cause of
yours. If we saw a large dataset of grandfather/grandchild blood
type pairs, we’d see a correlation. However, your father’s blood
type is a more direct cause, and the connection between your
grandfather’s blood type and yours passes through your father.
So, if our goal were to predict your blood type, and we already
had your father’s blood type as a predictor, your paternal
grandfather’s blood type could provide no additional predictive
information. Thus, your blood type and your paternal
grandfather’s blood type are conditionally independent, given
your father’s blood type.

Figure 3.10 Causality implies conditional independence. Your paternal
grandfather’s blood type is a cause of your father’s, which is a cause of
yours. You and your paternal grandfather’s blood types are conditionally
independent given your father’s blood type because your father’s blood type
already contains all the information your grandfather’s type could provide
about yours.
The way causality makes correlated variables conditionally
independent is called the causal Markov property. In graphical
terms, the causal Markov property means that variables are
conditionally independent of their non-descendants (e.g.,
ancestors, uncles/aunts, cousins, etc.) given their parents in the
graph.
This “non-descendants” definition of the causal Markov property
is sometimes called the local Markov property. An equivalent
articulation is called the Markov factorization property, which is
the property that if your causal DAG is true, you can factorize a
joint probability into conditional probabilities of variables, given
their parents in the causal DAG:
If our transportation DAG is a true representation of the DGP,
then the local Markov property should hold. In the next chapter,
we’ll see how to test this assumption with data.

3.1.7 DAGs can provide scaffolding for probabilistic
ML models
Many modeling approaches in probabilistic machine learning use
a DAG as the model structure. Examples include directed
graphical models (aka Bayesian networks) and latent variable
models (e.g., topic models). Deep generative models, such as
variational autoencoders, often have an underlying directed
graph.
The advantage of building a probabilistic machine learning
model on top of a causal graph is, rather obviously, that you
have a probabilistic causal machine learning model. You can train
it on data, and you can use it for prediction and other inferences,
like any probabilistic machine learning model. Moreover,
because it is built on top of a causal DAG, it is a causal model, so
you can use it to make causal inferences.
A benefit that follows from providing scaffolding is that the
parameters in those models are modular and encode causal
invariance. Before exploring this benefit, let’s first build a
graphical model on the transportation DAG.
Building a probabilistic machine learning model on a causal DAG
Recall our factorization of the joint probability distribution of the
transportation variables over the ordering of the variables in the
transportation DAG.
We have a set of factors, {P (a ), P (s ), P (e |s,a ), P (o |e), P (r  |e),
P (t  |o,r )}. From here on, we’ll build on the term “Markov kernel”
from chapter 2 and call these factors causal Markov kernels.
We’ll build our probabilistic machine learning model by
implementing these causal Markov kernels in code and then
composing them into one model. Our implementations for each
kernel will be able to return a probability value, given input

arguments. For example, P (a ) will take an outcome value for A
and return a probability value for that outcome. Similarly, P 
(t |o,r ) will take in values for T, O, and R and return a probability
value for T  = t, where t is the queried value. Our
implementations will also be able to generate from the causal
Markov kernels. To do this, these implementations will require
parameters that map the inputs to the outputs. We’ll use
standard statistical learning approaches to fit those parameters
from the data.
3.1.8 Training a model on the causal DAG
Consider the DGP for the transportation DAG. What sort of data
would this process generate?
Suppose we administered a survey covering 500 individuals,
getting values for each of the variables in this DAG. The data
encodes the variables in our DAG as follows:
Age (A) —Recorded as young (“young”) for individuals up to
and including 29 years, adult (“adult”) for individuals
between 30 and 60 years old (inclusive), and old (“old”) for
people 61 and over
Gender (S) —The self-reported gender of an individual,
recorded as male (“M”), female (“F”), or other (“O”)
Education (E) —The highest level of education or training
completed by the individual, recorded either high school
(“high”) or university degree (“uni”)
Occupation (O) —Employee (“emp”) or a self-employed
worker (“self”)
Residence (R) —The population size of the city the individual
lives in, recorded as small (“small”) or big (“big”)
Travel (T) —The means of transport favored by the individual,
recorded as car (“car”), train (“train”), or other (“other”)

LABELING CAUSAL ABSTRACTIONS
How we conceptualize the variables of a model matters greatly
in machine learning. For example, ImageNet, a database of 14
million images, contains anachronistic and offensive labels for
racial categories. Even if renamed to be less offensive, race
categories themselves are fluid across time and culture. What
are the “correct” labels to use in a predictive algorithm?
How we define our variables isn’t just a question of politics and
census forms. A simple thought experiment by philosopher
Nelson Goodman shows how a simple change in label can
change a prediction to a contradictory prediction. Suppose you
regularly search for gems and record the color of every gem
you find. It turns out 100% of the gems in your dataset are
green. Now let’s define a new label “grue” to mean “green if
observed before now, blue otherwise.” So 100% of your data is
“green” or “grue,” depending on your choice of label. Now
suppose you predict the future based on extrapolating from
the past. Then you can predict the next emerald will be green
based on data where all past emeralds were green, or you can
predict the next emerald will be “grue” (i.e., blue) based on
the data that all past emeralds were “grue.” Obviously, you
would never invent such an absurd label, but this thought
experiment is enough to show that the inference depends on
the abstraction.
In data science and machine learning, we’re often encouraged
to blindly model data and not to think about the DGP. We’re
encouraged to take the variable names for granted as columns
in a spreadsheet or attributes in a database table. When
possible, it is better to choose abstractions that are
appropriate to the inference problem and collect or encode
data according to that abstraction. When it is not possible,
keep in mind that the results of your analysis will depend on
how other people have defined the variables.

In chapter 7, I’ll introduce the idea of “no causation without
manipulation”—an idea that provides a useful heuristic for how
to define causal variables.
The variables in the transportation data are all categorical
variables. In this simple categorical case, we can rely on a
graphical modeling library like pgmpy.
Listing 3.3 Loading transportation data
import pandas as pd
url='https://raw.githubusercontent.com/altdeep/causalML/master/datasets
↪/transportation_survey.csv'    #1
data = pd.read_csv(url)
data
#1 We’ll load the data into a pandas ΔataFrame with the read_csv method.
This produces the DataFrame in figure 3.11.

Figure 3.11 An example of data from the DGP underlying the transportation
model. In this case, the data is 500 survey responses.

The BayesianNetwork class we initialized in listing 3.2 has a fit
method that will learn the parameters of our causal Markov
kernels. Since our variables are categorical, our causal Markov
kernels will be in the form of conditional probability tables
represented by pgmpy’s TabularCPD class. The fit method will fit
(“learn”) estimates of the parameters of those conditional
probability tables using the data.
Listing 3.4 Learning parameters for the causal Markov kernels
from pgmpy.models import BayesianNetwork
model = BayesianNetwork(
      [
        ('A', 'E'),
        ('S', 'E'),
        ('E', 'O'),
        ('E', 'R'),
        ('O', 'T'),
        ('R', 'T')
     ]
)
model.fit(data)    #1
causal_markov_kernels = model.get_cpds()     #2
print(causal_markov_kernels)  #2
#1 The fit method on the BayesianNetwork object will estimate parameters
from data (a pandas ΔataFrame).
#2 Retrieve and view the causal Markov kernels learned by fit.
This returns the following output:
[<TabularCPD representing P(A:3) at 0x7fb030dd1050>,
 <TabularCPD representing P(E:2 | A:3, S:2) at 0x7fb0318121d0>,
 <TabularCPD representing P(S:2) at 0x7fb03189fe90>,
 <TabularCPD representing P(O:2 | E:2) at 0x7fb030de85d0>,
 <TabularCPD representing P(R:2 | E:2) at 0x7fb030dfa890>,
 <TabularCPD representing P(T:3 | O:2, R:2) at 0x7fb0316c9110>]
Let’s look at the structure of the causal Markov kernel for the
transportation variable T. We can see from printing out the
causal_markov_kernels list that T is the last item in the list.
cmk_T = causal_markov_kernels[-1]
print(cmk_T)
We get the following output:

+----------+---------+----------+---------+----------+
| O        | O(emp)  | O(emp)   | O(self) | O(self)  |
+----------+---------+----------+---------+----------+
| R        | R(big)  | R(small) | R(big)  | R(small) |
+----------+---------+----------+---------+----------+
| T(car)   | 0.70343 | 0.52439  | 0.44444 | 1.0      |
+----------+---------+----------+---------+--------- +
| T(other) | 0.13480 | 0.08536  | 0.33333 | 0.0      |
+----------+---------+----------+---------+----------+
| T(train) | 0.16176 | 0.39024  | 0.22222 | 0.0      |
+----------+---------+----------+---------+----------+
Note that in this printout, I truncated the numbers so the table
fits on the page.
cmk_T is the implementation of the causal Markov kernel P (T |O,R )
as a conditional probability table, a type of lookup table where,
given the values of T, O, and R, we get the corresponding
probability mass value. For example, P (T  = car|O  = emp, R = 
big) = 0.7034. Note that these are conditional probabilities. For
each combination of values for O and R, there are conditional
probabilities for the three outcomes of T that sum to 1. For
example, when O  = emp and R  = big, P (T  = car| O  = emp, R  = 
big) + (P (T  = other | O  = emp, R  = big) + P (T  = train| O  = emp,
R  = big) = 1.
The causal Markov kernel in the case of nodes with no parents is
just a simple probability table. For example,
print(causal_markov_kernels[2]) prints the causal Markov kernel for
gender (S), the third item in the causal_markov_kernels list.
+------+-------+
| S(F) | 0.517 |
+------+-------+
| S(M) | 0.473 |
+------+-------+
| S(O) | 0.010 |
+------+-------+
The fit method learns parameters by calculating the proportions
of each class in the data. Alternatively, we could use other
techniques for parameter learning.

3.1.9 Different techniques for parameter learning
There are several ways we could go about training these
parameters. Let’s look at a few common ways of training
parameters in conditional probability tables.
MAXIMUM LIKELIHOOD ESTIMATION
The learning algorithm I used in the fit method on the
BayesianNetwork model object was maximum likelihood estimation
(discussed in chapter 2). It is the default parameter learning
method, so I didn’t specify “maximum likelihood” in the call to
fit. Generally, maximum likelihood estimation seeks the
parameter that maximizes the likelihood of seeing the data we
use to train the model. In the context of categorical data,
maximum likelihood estimation is equivalent to taking
proportions of counts in the data. For example, the parameter for
P(O=emp|E=high) is calculated as:
BAYESIAN ESTIMATION
In chapter 2, I also introduced Bayesian estimation. It is
generally mathematically intractable and relies on
computationally expensive algorithms (e.g., sampling algorithms
and variational inference). A key exception is the case of
conjugate priors, where the prior distribution and the target
(posterior) distribution have the same canonical form. That
means the code implementation can just calculate the
parameter values of the target distribution with simple math,
without the need for complicated Bayesian inference algorithms.
For example, pgmpy implements a Dirichlet conjugate prior for
categorical outcomes. For each value of O in P (O |E  = high), we
have a probability value, and we want to infer these probability
values from the data. A Bayesian approach assigns a prior

distribution to these values. A good choice for a prior on a set of
probability values is the Dirichlet distribution, because it is
defined for a simplex, a set of numbers between zero and one
that sum to one. Further it is conjugate to categorical
distributions like P (O |E  = high), meaning the posterior
distribution on the parameter values is also a Dirichlet
distribution. That means we can calculate point estimates of the
probability values using simple math, combining counts in the
data and parameters in the prior. pgmpy does this math for us.
Listing 3.5 Bayesian point estimation with a Dirichlet conjugate prior
from pgmpy.estimators import BayesianEstimator     #1
model.fit(
    data,
    estimator=BayesianEstimator,    #2
    prior_type="dirichlet",
    pseudo_counts=1    #3
) 
causal_markov_kernels = model.get_cpds()      #4
cmk_T = causal_markov_kernels[-1]     #4
print(cmk_T)  #4
#1 Import BayesianEstimator and initialize it on the model and data.
#2 Pass the estimator object to the fit method.
#3 pseudo_counts refers to the parameters of the Δirichlet prior.
#4 Extract the causal Markov kernels and view P(T|O,R).
The preceding code prints the following output:
+----------+--------------------+-----+--------------------+----------+
| O        | O(emp)             | ... | O(self)            | O(self)  |
+----------+--------------------+-----+--------------------+----------+
| R        | R(big)             | ... | R(big)             | R(small) |
+----------+--------------------+-----+--------------------+----------+
| T(car)   | 0.7007299270072993 | ... | 0.4166666666666667 | 0.5      |
+----------+--------------------+-----+--------------------+----------+
| T(other) | 0.1362530413625304 | ... | 0.3333333333333333 | 0.25     |
+----------+--------------------+-----+--------------------+----------+
| T(train) | 0.1630170316301703 | ... | 0.25               | 0.25     |
+----------+--------------------+-----+--------------------+----------+
In contrast to maximum likelihood estimation, Bayesian
estimation of a categorical parameter with a Dirichlet prior acts
like a smoothing mechanism. For example, the maximum
likelihood parameter estimate says 100% of self-employed
people in small towns take a car to work. This is probably
extreme. Certainly, some self-employed people bike to work—we
just didn’t manage to survey any of them. Some small cities,

such as Crystal City in the US state of Virginia (population
22,000), have subway stations. I’d wager at least a few of the
entrepreneurs in those cities use the train.
CAUSAL MODELERS AND BAYESIANS
The Bayesian philosophy goes beyond mere parameter
estimation. Indeed, Bayesian philosophy has much in common
with DAG-based causal modeling. Bayesians try to encode
subjective beliefs, uncertainty, and prior knowledge into
“prior” probability distributions on variables in the model.
Causal modelers try to encode subjective beliefs and prior
knowledge about the DGP into the form of a causal DAG. The
two approaches are compatible. Given a causal DAG, you can
be Bayesian about inferring the parameters of the probabilistic
model you build on top of the causal DAG. You can even be
Bayesian about the DAG itself and compute probability
distributions over possible DAGs!
I focus on causality in this book and keep Bayesian discussions
to a minimum. But we’ll use the libraries Pyro (and its NumPy-
JAX alternative NumPyro) to implement causal models; these
libraries provide complete support for Bayesian inference on
models as well as parameters. In chapter 11, we’ll look at an
example of Bayesian inference of a causal effect using a causal
graphical model we build from scratch.
OTHER TECHNIQUES FOR PARAMETER ESTIMATION
We need not use a conditional probability table to represent the
causal Markov kernels. There are models within the generalized
linear modeling framework for modeling categorical outcomes.
For some of the variables in the transportation model, we might
have used non-categorical outcomes. Age, for example, might
have been recorded as an integer outcome in the survey. For
variables with numeric outcomes, we might use other modeling

approaches. You can also use neural network architectures to
model individual causal Markov kernels.
Parametric assumptions refer to how we specify the outcomes of
a node in the DAG (e.g., category or real number) and how we
map parents to the outcome (e.g., table or neural network). Note
that the causal assumptions encoded by the causal DAG are
decoupled from the parametric assumptions for a causal Markov
kernel. For example, when we assumed that age was a direct
cause of education level and encoded that into our DAG as an
edge, we didn’t have to decide if we were going to treat age as
an ordered set of classes, as an integer, or as seconds elapsed
since birth, etc. Furthermore, we didn’t have to know whether to
use a conditional categorical distribution or a regression model.
That step comes after we specify the causal DAG and want to
implement P (E |A, S  ).
Similarly, when we make predictions and probabilistic inferences
on a trained causal model, the considerations of what inference
or prediction algorithms to use, while important, are separate
from our causal questions. This separation simplifies our work.
Often we can build our knowledge and skill set in causal
modeling and reasoning independently of our knowledge of
statistics, computational Bayes, and applied machine learning.
3.1.10 Learning parameters when there are latent
variables
Since we are modeling the DGP and not the data, it is likely that
some nodes in the causal DAG will not be observed in the data.
Fortunately, probabilistic machine learning provides us with tools
for learning the parameters of causal Markov kernels of latent
variables.
LEARNING LATENT VARIABLES WITH PGMPY
To illustrate, suppose the education variable in the transportation
survey data was not recorded. pgmpy gives us a utility for

learning the parameters of the causal Markov kernel for latent E
using an algorithm called structural expectation maximization,
which is a variant of parameter learning with maximum
likelihood.
Listing 3.6 Training a causal graphical model with a latent variable
import pandas as pd
from pgmpy.models import BayesianNetwork
from pgmpy.estimators import ExpectationMaximization as EM
url='https://raw.githubusercontent.com/altdeep/causalML/master/datasets
↪/transportation_survey.csv'     #1
data = pd.read_csv(url)    #1
data_sans_E = data[['A', 'S', 'O', 'R', 'T']]    #2
model_with_latent = BayesianNetwork(
       [
        ('A', 'E'),
        ('S', 'E'),
        ('E', 'O'),
        ('E', 'R'),
        ('O', 'T'),
        ('R', 'T')
     ],
     latents={"E"}    #3
)
estimator = EM(model_with_latent, data_sans_E)     #4
cmks_with_latent = estimator.get_parameters(latent_card={'E': 2})    #4
print(cmks_with_latent[1].to_factor())    #5
#1 Δownload the data and convert to a pandas ΔataFrame.
#2 Keep all the columns except education (E).
#3 Indicate which variables are latent when training the model.
#4 Run the structural expectation maximization algorithm to learn the
causal Markov kernel for E. You have to indicate the cardinality of the latent
variable.
#5 Print out the learned causal Markov kernel for E. Print it as a factor
object for legibility.
The print line prints a factor object.

+------+----------+------+--------------+
| E    | A        | S    |   phi(E,A,S) |
+======+==========+======+==============+
| E(0) | A(adult) | S(F) |       0.1059 |
+------+----------+------+--------------+
| E(0) | A(adult) | S(M) |       0.1124 |
+------+----------+------+--------------+
| E(0) | A(old)   | S(F) |       0.4033 |
+------+----------+------+--------------+
| E(0) | A(old)   | S(M) |       0.2386 |
+------+----------+------+--------------+
| E(0) | A(young) | S(F) |       0.4533 |
+------+----------+------+--------------+
| E(0) | A(young) | S(M) |       0.6080 |
+------+----------+------+--------------+
| E(1) | A(adult) | S(F) |       0.8941 |
+------+----------+------+--------------+
| E(1) | A(adult) | S(M) |       0.8876 |
+------+----------+------+--------------+
| E(1) | A(old)   | S(F) |       0.5967 |
+------+----------+------+--------------+
| E(1) | A(old)   | S(M) |       0.7614 |
+------+----------+------+--------------+
| E(1) | A(young) | S(F) |       0.5467 |
+------+----------+------+--------------+
| E(1) | A(young) | S(M) |       0.3920 |
+------+----------+------+--------------+
The outcomes for E are 0 and 1 because the algorithm doesn’t
know the outcome names. Perhaps 0 is “high” (high school) and
1 is “uni” (university), but correctly mapping the default
outcomes from a latent variable estimation method to the names
of those outcomes would require further assumptions.
There are other algorithms for learning parameters when there
are latent variables, including some that use special parametric
assumptions (i.e., functional assumptions about how the latent
variables relate to the observed variables).
LATENT VARIABLES AND IDENTIFICATION
In statistical inference, we say a parameter is “identified” when
it is theoretically possible to learn its true value given an infinite
number of examples in the data. It is “unidentified” if more data
doesn’t get you closer to learning its true value. Unfortunately,
your data may not be sufficient to learn the causal Markov
kernels of the latent variables in your causal DAG. If we did not
care about representing causality, we could restrict ourselves to
a latent variable graphical model with latent variables that are
identifiable from data. But we must build a causal DAG that

represents the DGP, even if we can’t identify the latent variables
and parameters given the data.
That said, even if you have non-identifiable parameters in your
causal model, you still may be able to identify the quantity that
answers your causal question. Indeed, much of causal inference
methodology is focused on robust estimation of causal effects
(how much a cause affects an effect) despite having latent
“confounders.” We’ll cover this in detail in chapter 11. On the
other hand, even if your parameters are identified, the quantity
that answers your causal question may not be identified. We’ll
cover causal identification in detail in chapter 10.
3.1.11 Inference with a trained causal probabilistic
machine learning model
A probabilistic machine learning model of a set of variables can
use computational inference algorithms to infer the conditional
probability of an outcome for any subset of the variables, given
outcomes for the other variables. We use the variable
elimination algorithm for a directed graphical model with
categorical outcomes (introduced in chapter 2).
For example, suppose we want to compare education levels
amongst car drivers to that of train riders. We can calculate and
compare P (E |T  ) when T  = car to when T =train by using
variable elimination, an inference algorithm for tabular graphical
models.
Listing 3.7 Inference on the trained causal graphical model
from pgmpy.inference import VariableElimination    #1
inference = VariableElimination(model)     
query1 = inference.query(['E'], evidence={"T": "train"})
query2 = inference.query(['E'], evidence={"T": "car"})
print("train")
print(query1)
print("car")
print(query2)
#1 VariableElimination is an inference algorithm specific to graphical
models.
This prints the probability tables for “train” and “car.”

"train"
+---------+----------+
| E       |   phi(E) |
+=========+==========+
| E(high) |   0.6162 |
+---------+----------+
| E(uni)  |   0.3838 |
+---------+----------+
"car"
+---------+----------+
| E       |   phi(E) |
+=========+==========+
| E(high) |   0.5586 |
+---------+----------+
| E(uni)  |   0.4414 |
+---------+----------+
It seems car drivers are more likely to have a university
education than train riders: (P (E ='uni'|T  ='car') > P (E ='uni'|T 
='train'). That inference is based on our DAG-based causal
assumption that university education indirectly determines how
people get to work.
In a tool like Pyro, you have to be a bit more hands-on with the
inference algorithm. The following listing illustrates the inference
of P (E |T =“train”) using a probabilistic inference algorithm called
importance sampling. First, we’ll specify the model. Rather than
fit the parameters, we’ll explicitly specify the parameter values
we fit with pgmpy.

Listing 3.8 Implementing the trained causal model in Pyro
import torch
import pyro
from pyro.distributions import Categorical
A_alias = ['young', 'adult', 'old']     #1
S_alias = ['M', 'F']     #1
E_alias = ['high', 'uni']    #1
O_alias = ['emp', 'self']   #1
R_alias = ['small', 'big']    #1
T_alias = ['car', 'train', 'other']    #1
A_prob = torch.tensor([0.3,0.5,0.2])    #2
S_prob = torch.tensor([0.6,0.4])    #2
E_prob = torch.tensor([[[0.75,0.25], [0.72,0.28], [0.88,0.12]],    #2
                     [[0.64,0.36], [0.7,0.3], [0.9,0.1]]])     #2
O_prob = torch.tensor([[0.96,0.04], [0.92,0.08]])     #2
R_prob = torch.tensor([[0.25,0.75], [0.2,0.8]])     #2
T_prob = torch.tensor([[[0.48,0.42,0.1], [0.56,0.36,0.08]],     #2
                     [[0.58,0.24,0.18], [0.7,0.21,0.09]]])     #2
def model():    #3
   A = pyro.sample('age', Categorical(probs=A_prob))    #3
   S = pyro.sample('gender', Categorical(probs=S_prob))    #3
   E = pyro.sample('education', Categorical(probs=E_prob[S][A]))    #3
   O = pyro.sample('occupation', Categorical(probs=O_prob[E]))    #3
   R = pyro.sample('residence', Categorical(probs=R_prob[E]))   #3
   T = pyro.sample('transportation', Categorical(probs=T_prob[R][O]))   #3  
   Return {'A': A, 'S': S, 'E': E, 'O': O, 'R': R, 'T': T}     #3
pyro.render_model(model)     #4
#1 The categorical distribution only returns integers, so it’s useful to write
the integers’ mapping to categorical outcome names.
#2 For simplicity, we’ll use rounded versions of parameters learned with the
fit method in pgmpy (listing 3.4), though we could have learned the
parameters in a training procedure.
#3 When we implement the model in Pyro, we specify the causal ΔAG
implicitly using code logic.
#4 We can then generate a figure of the implied ΔAG using
pyro.render_model(). Note that we need to have Graphviz installed.
The pyro.render_model function draws the implied causal DAG from
the Pyro model in figure 3.12.

Figure 3.12 You can visualize the causal DAG in Pyro by using the
pyro.render_model() function. This assumes you have Graphviz installed.
Pyro provides probabilistic inference algorithms, such as
importance sampling, that we can apply to our causal model.

Listing 3.9 Inference on the causal model in Pyro
import numpy as np
import pyro
from pyro.distributions import Categorical
from pyro.infer import Importance, EmpiricalMarginal  #1
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
conditioned_model = pyro.condition(    #2
    model,    #3
    data={'transportation':torch.tensor(1.)}    #3
)
m = 5000     #4
posterior = pyro.infer.Importance(    #5
    conditioned_model,    #5
    num_samples=m
).run()     #6
E_marginal = EmpiricalMarginal(posterior, "education")     #7
E_samples = [E_marginal().item() for _ in range(m)]   #7
E_unique, E_counts = np.unique(E_samples, return_counts=True)     #8
E_probs = E_counts / m    #8
plt.bar(E_unique, E_probs, align='center', alpha=0.5)     #9
plt.xticks(E_unique, E_alias)    #9
plt.ylabel('probability')    #9
plt.xlabel('education')     #9
plt.title('P(E | T = "train") - Importance Sampling')    #9
#1 We’ll use two inference-related classes, Importance and
EmpiricalMarginal.
#2 pyro.condition is a conditioning operation on the model.
#3 It takes in the model and evidence for conditioning on. The evidence is a
dictionary that maps variable names to values. The need to specify variable
names during inference is why we have the name argument in the calls to
pyro.sample. Here we condition on T=“train”.
#4 We’ll run an inference algorithm that will generate m samples.
#5 I use an inference algorithm called importance sampling. The Importance
class constructs this inference algorithm. It takes the conditioned model and
the number of samples.
#6 Run the random process algorithm with the run method. The inference
algorithm will generate from the joint probability of the variables we didn’t
condition on (everything but T) given the variables we conditioned on (T).
#7 We are interested in the conditional probability distribution of education,
so we extract education values from the posterior.
#8 Based on these samples, we produce a Monte Carlo estimation of the
probabilities in P(E|T=“train”).
#9 Plot a visualization of the learned probabilities.
This produces the plot in figure 3.13. The probabilities shown are
close to the results from the pgmpy model, though they’re
slightly different due to different algorithms and the rounding of
the parameter estimates to two decimal places.

This probabilistic inference is not yet causal inference—we’ll look
at examples combining causal inference with probabilistic
inference starting in chapter 7. In chapter 8, you’ll see how to
use probabilistic inference to implement causal inference. For
now, we’ll look at the benefit of parameter modularity, and at
how parameters encode causal invariance.
Figure 3.13 Visualization of the P(E|T=“train”) distribution
3.2 Causal invariance and parameter
modularity
Suppose we were interested in modeling the relationship
between altitude and temperature. The two are clearly
correlated; the higher up you go, the colder it gets. However,
you know temperature doesn’t cause altitude, or heating the air

within a city would cause the city to fly. Altitude is the cause, and
temperature is the effect.
We can come up with a simple causal DAG that we think
captures the relationship between temperature and altitude,
along with other causes, as shown in figure 3.14. Let’s have A be
altitude, C be cloud cover, L be latitude, S be season, and T be
temperature. The DAG in figure 3.14 has five causal Markov
kernels: {P (A), P (C  ), P (L ), P (S  ), P (T  |A, C, L, S  )}.
Figure 3.14 A simple model of outdoor temperature
To train a causal graphical model on top of this DAG, we need to
learn parameters for each of these causal Markov kernels.
3.2.1 Independence of mechanism and parameter
modularity
There are some underlying thermodynamic mechanisms in the
DGP underlying the causal Markov kernels in our temperature
DAG. For example, the causal Markov kernel P (T  |A, C, L, S  ) is
the conditional probability induced by the physics-based
mechanism, wherein altitude, cloud cover, latitude, and season
drive the temperature. That mechanism is distinct from the
mechanism that determines cloud cover (according to our DAG).

Independence of mechanism refers to this distinction between
mechanisms.
The independence of the mechanism leads to a property called
parameter modularity. In our model, for each causal Markov
kernel, we choose a parameterized representation of the causal
Markov kernels. If P (T  |A, C, L, S  ) and P(C  ) are distinct
mechanisms, then our representations of P (T  |A, C, L, S  ) and
P(C  ) are representations of distinct mechanisms. That means we
can change one representation without worrying about how that
change affects the other representations. Such modularity is
atypical in statistical models; you can’t usually change one part
of a model and expect the other part to be unaffected.
One way this comes in handy is during training. Typically, when
you train a model, you optimize all the parameters at the same
time. Parameter modularity means you could train the
parameters for each causal Markov kernel separately, or train
them simultaneously as decoupled sets, allowing you to enjoy
some dimensionality reduction during training. In Bayesian
terms, the parameter sets are a priori independent (though they
are generally dependent in the posterior). This provides a nice
causal justification for using an independent prior distribution for
each causal Markov kernel’s parameter set.
3.2.2 Causal transfer learning, data fusion, and
invariant prediction
You may not be a climatologist or a meteorologist. Still, you know
the relationship between temperature and altitude has
something to do with air pressure, climate, sunlight, and such.
You also know that whatever the physics of that relationship is,
the physics is the same in Katmandu as it is in El Paso. So, when
we train a causal Markov kernel on data solely collected from
Katmandu, we learn a causal representation of a mechanism that
is invariant between Katmandu and El Paso. This invariance
helps with transfer learning; we should be able to use that

trained causal Markov kernel to make inferences about the
temperature in El Paso.
Of course, there are caveats to leveraging this notion of causal
invariance. For example, this assumes your causal model is
correct and that there is enough information about the
underlying mechanism in the Katmandu data to effectively apply
what you’ve learned about that mechanism in El Paso.
Several advanced methods lean heavily on causal invariance and
independence of mechanism. For example, causal data fusion
uses this idea to learn a causal model by combining multiple
datasets. Causal transfer learning uses causal invariance to
make causal inferences using data outside the domain of the
training data. Causal invariant prediction leverages causal
invariance in prediction tasks. See the chapter notes at
https://www.altdeep.ai/p/causalaibook for references.
3.2.3 Fitting parameters with common sense
In the temperature model, we have an intuition about the
physics of the mechanism that induces P (T  |A, C, L, S  ). In non-
natural science domains, such as econometrics and other social
sciences, the “physics” of the system is more abstract and
harder to write down. Fortunately, we can rely on similar
invariance-based intuition in these non-natural science domains.
In these domains, we can still assume the causal Markov kernels
correspond to distinct causal mechanisms in the real world,
assuming the model is true. For example, recall P (T  |O, R  ) in our
transportation model. We still assume the underlying mechanism
is distinct from the others; if there were changes to the
mechanism underlying P (T  |O, R  ), only P (T  |O, R  ) should
change—other kernels in the model should not. If something
changes the mechanism underlying P (R  |E  ), the causal Markov
kernel for R, this change should affect P (R  |E  ) but have no
effect on the parameters of P (T  |O, R  ).
This invariance can help us estimate parameters without
statistical learning by reasoning about the underlying causal

mechanism. For example, let’s look again at the causal Markov
kernel P (R  |E  ) (recall R is residence, E is education). Let’s try to
reason our way to estimates of the parameters of this
distribution without using statistical learning.
People who don’t get more than a high school degree are more
likely to stay in their hometowns. However, people from small
towns who attain college degrees are likely to move to a big city
where they can apply their credentials to get higher-paying jobs.
Now let’s think about US demographics. Suppose a web search
tells you that 80% of the US lives in an urban area (P (R   = big) =
.8), while 95% of college degree holders live in an urban area (P 
(R  =big|E  = uni) = .95). Further, 25% of the overall adult
population in the US has a university degree (P (E  = uni) = .25).
Then, with some back-of-the-envelope math, you calculate your
probability values as P (R  =small|E  = high)=.25, P (R  = big|E  = 
high) = .75, P (R   =small|E  = uni) = .05, and P (R  = big|E  = uni) =
.95. The ability to calculate parameters in this manner is
particularly useful if data is unavailable for parameter learning.
3.3 Your causal question scopes the DAG
When a modeler meets a problem for the first time, there is
often already a set of available data, and a common mistake is
to define your DAG using only the variables in that data. Letting
the data scope your DAG is attractive, because you don’t have to
decide what variables to include in your DAG. But causal
modelers model the DGP, not the data. The true causal structure
in the world doesn’t care about what happens to be measured in
your dataset. In your causal DAG, you should include causally
relevant variables whether they are in your dataset or not.
But if the data doesn’t define the DAG’s scope, what does? While
your data has a fixed set of variables, the variables that could
comprise your DGP are only bounded by your imagination. Given
a variable, you could include its causes, those causes’ causes,
those causes’ causes’ causes, continuing all the way back to

Aristotle’s “prime mover,” the single cause of everything.
Fortunately, there is no need to go back that far. Let’s look at a
procedure you can use to select variables for inclusion in your
causal DAG.
3.3.1 Selecting variables for inclusion in the DAG
Recall that there are several kinds of causal inference questions.
As I mentioned in chapter 1, causal effect inference is the most
common type of causal question. I use causal effect inference as
an example, but this workflow is meant for all types of causal
questions.
1. Include variables central to your causal question(s) —The
first step is to include all the variables central to your causal
question. If you intend to ask multiple questions, include all
the variables relevant to those questions. As an example,
consider figure 3.15. Suppose that we intend to ask about
the causal effect of V on U and Y. These become the first
variables we include in the DAG.
2. Include any common causes for the variables in step 1—Add
any common causes for the variables you included in the
first step. In our example, you would start with variables U, V
and Y in figure 3.15, and trace back their causal lineages and
identify shared ancestors. These shared ancestors are
common causes. In figure 3.16, W0, W1, and W2 are common
causes of V, U, and Y.
Figure 3.15 First include variables central to your causal question(s).
Here, suppose you are interested in asking questions about V, U, and Y.

Figure 3.16 Satisfy causal sufficiency; include common causes to the
variables from step 1.
In formal terms, a variable is a common cause Z of a pair of
variables X and Y if there is a directed path from Z to X that
does not include Y and a directed path from Z to Y that does
not include X. The formal principle of including common
causes is called causal sufficiency. A set of variables is
causally sufficient if it doesn’t exclude any common causes
between any pair of variables in the set. Furthermore, once
you include a common cause, you don’t have to include
earlier common causes on the same paths. For example,
figure 3.17 illustrates how we might exclude variables’
earlier common causes.

Figure 3.17 Once you include a common cause, you don’t have to
include any earlier common causes on the same paths to the step 1
variables.
In figure 3.17, W2 is on W0’s path to Y and U, but we include
W0 because it has its own path to V. In contrast, while C is a
common cause of V, Y, and U, W0 is on all of C’s paths to V, Y
and U, so we can exclude it after including W0. Similarly, W2
lets us exclude E, and W0 and W2 together let us exclude D.
3. Include variables that may be useful in causal inference
statistical analysis —Now we include variables that may be
useful in statistical methods for the causal inferences you
want to make. For example, in figure 3.18, suppose you were
interested in estimating the cause effect of V on Y. You might
want to include possible “instrumental variables.” We’ll
define these formally in part 4 of this book, but for now in a
causal effect question, an instrument is a parent of a
variable of interest, and it can help in statistical estimation of
the causal effect. In figure 3.18, Z can function as an
instrumental variable. You do not need to include Z for
causal sufficiency, but you might choose to include it to help
with quantifying the causal effect.

Figure 3.18 Include variables that may be useful in the causal inference
statistical analysis. W’s are confounders, Z’s are instruments, X’s are
effect modifiers, Y is the outcome, V is a treatment, and U is a front
door mediator.
Similarly, X0 and X1 could also be of use in the analysis by
accounting for other sources of variation in Y. We could
potentially use them to reduce variance in the statistical
estimation of a causal effect. Alternatively, we may be
interested in the heterogeneity of the causal effect (how the
causal effect varies) across subsets of the population defined
by X0 and X1. We’ll look at causal effect heterogeneity more
closely in chapter 11.
4. Include variables that help the DAG communicate a
complete story —Finally, include any variables that help the
DAG better function as a communicative tool. Consider the
common cause D in figure 3.19.

Figure 3.19 Include variables that help the DAG tell a complete story. In
this example, despite having excluded D in step 2 (figure 3.17) we still
might want to include D if it has communicative value.
In figure 3.17, we concluded that the common cause D could
be excluded after including common causes W0 and W2. But
perhaps D is an important variable in how domain experts
conceptualize the domain. While it is not useful in
quantifying the causal effect of V on U and Y, leaving it out
might feel awkward. If so, including it may help the DAG tell
a better story by showing how a key variable relates to the
variables you included. When your causal DAG tells a
convincing story, your causal analysis is more convincing.
3.3.2 Including variables in causal DAGs by their
role in inference
Many experts in causal inference de-emphasize writing their
assumptions in the form of a causal DAG in favor of specifying a
set of relevant variables, according to their role in causal
inference calculations. Focusing on variable-role-in-inference
over a causal DAG is common in econometrics pedagogy.
Examples of such roles include terms I’ve already introduced,
such as “common cause,” “instrumental variable,” and “effect
modifier.” Again, we’ll define these formally in chapter 11.

For now, I want to make clear that this is not a competing
paradigm. An economist might say they are interested in the
causal effect of V on U, conditional on some “effect modifiers,”
and that they plan to “adjust for the influence of common
causes” using an “instrumental variable.” These roles all
correspond to structure in a causal DAG; common causes of U
and V in figure 3.19 are W0, W1, and W2. Z is an instrumental
variable, and X0 and X1 are effect modifiers. Assuming variables
with these roles are important to your causal effect estimation
analysis is implicitly assuming that your DGP follows the causal
DAG with this structure.
In fact, given a set of variables and their roles, we can construct
the implied causal DAG on that set. The DoWhy causal inference
library shows us how.

Listing 3.10 Creating a DAG based on roles in causal effect inference
from dowhy import datasets
import networkx as nx
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
sim_data = datasets.linear_dataset(     #1
    beta=10.0,
    num_treatments=1,    #2
    num_instruments=2,     #3
    num_effect_modifiers=2,     #4
    num_common_causes=5,     #5
    num_frontdoor_variables=1,   #6
    num_samples=100,
)
dag = nx.parse_gml(sim_data['gml_graph'])     #7
pos = {    #7
 'X0': (600, 350),    #7
 'X1': (600, 250),    #7
 'FD0': (300, 300),   #7
 'W0': (0, 400),   #7
 'W1': (150, 400),   #7
 'W2': (300, 400),   #7
 'W3': (450, 400),   #7
 'W4': (600, 400),   #7
 'Z0': (10, 250),    #7
 'Z1': (10, 350),    #7
 'v0': (100, 300),   #7
 'y': (500, 300)     #7
}    #7
options = {    #7
    "font_size": 12,    #7
    "node_size": 800,   #7
    "node_color": "white",   #7
    "edgecolors": "black",   #7
    "linewidths": 1,    #7
    "width": 1,    #7
}    #7
nx.draw_networkx(dag, pos, **options)    #7
ax = plt.gca()   #7
ax.margins(x=0.40)    #7
plt.axis("off")   #7
plt.show() #7
#1 datasets.linear_ dataset generates a ΔAG from the specified variables.
#2 Add one treatment variable, like V in figure 3.19.
#3 Z in figure 3.19 is an example of an instrumental variable; a variable that
is a cause of the treatment, but its only causal path to the outcome is
through the treatment. Here we create two instruments.
#4 X 0 and X 1 in figure 3.19 are examples of “effect modifiers” that help
model heterogeneity in the causal effect. ΔoWhy defines these as other
causes of the outcome (though they needn’t be). Here we create two effect
modifiers.
#5 We add 5 common causes, like the three W 0, W 1, and W 2 in figure 3.19.
Unlike the nuanced structure between these variables in figure 3.19, the
structure here will be simple.
#6 Front door variables are on the path between the treatment and the
effect, like U in figure 3.19. Here we add one.

#7 This code extracts the graph, creates a plotting layout, and plots the
graph.
#8 This code extracts the graph, creates a plotting layout, and plots the
graph.
This code produces the DAG pictured in figure 3.20.
This role-based approach produces a simple template causal
DAG. It won’t give you the nuance that we have in figure 3.19,
and it will exclude the good storytelling variables that we added
in step 4, like D in figure 3.19. But it will be enough for tackling
the predefined causal effect query. It’s a great tool to use when
working with collaborators who are skeptical of DAGs but are
comfortable talking about variable roles. But don’t believe claims
that this approach is DAG-free. The DAG is just implicit in the
assumptions underlying the specification of the roles.
Figure 3.20 A causal DAG built by specifying variables by their role in causal
effect inference
Such a template method could be used for other causal queries
as well. You can also use this approach to get a basic causal DAG

in a first step, which you could then build upon to produce a
more nuanced graph.
3.4 Looking ahead: Model testing and
combining causal graphs with deep
learning
The big question when building a causal DAG is “what if my
causal DAG is wrong?” How can we be confident in our selected
DAG? In the next chapter, we’ll look at how to use data to stress
test our causal DAG. A key insight will be that while data can
never prove that a causal DAG is right, it can help show when it
is wrong. You’ll also learn about causal discovery, a set of
algorithms for learning causal DAGs from data.
In this chapter, we explored building a simple causal graphical
model on the DAG structure using pgmpy. Throughout the book,
you’ll see how to build more sophisticated causal graphical
models that leverage neural networks and automatic
differentiation. Even in those more sophisticated models, the
causal Markov property and the benefits of the DAG including
causal invariance, and parameter modularity will still hold.
Summary
The causal directed acyclic graph (DAG) can represent our
causal assumptions about the data generating process
(DGP).
The causal DAG is a useful tool for visualizing and
communicating your causal assumptions.
DAGs are fundamental data structures in computer science,
and they admit many fast algorithms we can bring to bear
on causal inference tasks.
DAGs link causality to conditional independence via the
causal Markov property.
DAGs can provide scaffolding for probabilistic ML models.

We can use various methods for statistical parameter
learning to train a probabilistic model on top of a DAG. These
include 
maximum 
likelihood 
estimation 
and 
Bayesian
estimation.
Given a causal DAG, the modeler can choose from a variety
of parameterizations of the causal Markov kernels in the
DAG, 
ranging 
from 
conditional 
probability 
tables 
to
regression models to neural networks.
A causally sufficient set of variables contains all common
causes between pairs in that set.
You can build a causal DAG by starting with a set of variables
of interest, expanding that to a causally sufficient set, adding
variables useful to causal inference analysis, and finally
adding any variables that help the DAG communicate a
complete story.
Each causal Markov kernel represents a distinct causal
mechanism 
that 
determines 
how 
the 
child 
node 
is
determined by its parents (assuming the DAG is correct).
“Independence of mechanism” refers to how mechanisms
are distinct from the others—a change to one mechanism
does not affect the others.
When you build a generative model on the causal DAG, the
parameters of each causal Markov kernel represents an
encoding of the underlying causal mechanism. This leads to
“parameter modularity,” which enables you to learn each
parameter set separately and even use common sense
reasoning to estimate parameters instead of data.
The fact that each causal Markov kernel represents a distinct
causal mechanism provides a source of invariance that can
be leveraged in advanced tasks, like transfer learning, data
fusion, and invariant prediction.
You can specify a DAG by the roles variables play in a
specific causal inference task.

4 Testing the DAG with
causal constraints
This chapter covers
Using d-separation to reason about how causality
constrains conditional independence
Using NetworkX and pgmpy to do d-separation analysis
Refuting a causal DAG using conditional independence
tests
Refuting a causal DAG when there are latent variables
Using 
and 
applying 
causal 
discovery 
algorithm
constraints
Our causal DAG, or any causal model, captures a set of
assumptions about the real world. Often, those assumptions
are testable with data. If we test an assumption, and it turns
out not to hold, then our causal model is wrong. In other
words, our test has “falsified” or “refuted” our model. When
this happens, we go back to the drawing board, come up
with a better model, and try to refute it again. We repeat this
loop until we get a model that is robust to our attempts to
refute it.
In this chapter, we’ll focus on using statistical conditional
independence-based testing to test our causal DAG. As you
learn more about the assumptions we can pack into a causal
model, and the inferences those assumptions allow you to
make, you’ll learn new ways to test and refute your model.
The workflow you’ll learn for running conditional
independence tests in this chapter can be applied to new
tests you may come up with.

4.1 How causality induces conditional
independence
Causal relationships constrain the data in certain ways, one
of which is by forcing variables to be conditionally
independent. This forced conditional independence gives us
a way to test our model with data using statistical tests for
independence; if we find strong evidence that two variables
are dependent when the DAG says they shouldn’t be, our
DAG is wrong.
In this chapter, we’ll test our causal DAG using these
statistical independence tests, including independence tests
on functions of observed variables that we can run when
other variables are latent in the data. At the end, we’ll look
at how these ideas enable causal discovery algorithms that
try to learn the causal DAG directly from data.
But before that, let’s see how causality induces conditional
independence. Consider again our blood type example,
shown in figure 4.1. Your father’s blood type is a direct cause
of yours, and your paternal grandfather’s blood type is an
indirect cause. Despite being a cause of your blood type,
your paternal grandfather’s blood type is conditionally
independent of your blood type, given your father’s.

Figure 4.1 Causality induces conditional independence. Your blood type
is conditionally independent of your paternal grandfather’s blood type
(an indirect cause), given your father’s blood type (a direct cause).
We know this from causality; the parents’ blood types
completely determine the blood type of the child. Your
paternal grandfather’s and grandmother’s blood types
completely determined your father’s blood type, but your
father’s and mother’s blood types completely determined
yours. Once we know your father’s blood type, there is
nothing more your paternal grandfather’s blood type can tell
us. In other words, your grandparent’s blood type is
independent of yours, given your parents.
4.1.1 Colliders
Now we’ll consider the collider, an interesting way in which
causality induces cases of dependence between variables
that are typically independent. Consider the canonical
example in figure 4.2. Whether the sprinkler is on or off, and
whether it is raining or not, are causes of whether the grass
is wet, but knowing that the sprinkler is off won’t help you
predict whether it’s raining. In other words, the state of the
sprinkler and whether it’s raining are independent. But when

you know the grass is wet, also knowing that the sprinkler is
off tells you it must be raining. So while the state of the
sprinkler and the presence or absence of rain are
independent, they become conditionally dependent, given
the state of the grass.
Figure 4.2 The sprinkler being on or off and whether or not it rains
causes the grass to be wet or not. Knowing that the sprinkler is off
won’t help you predict whether it’s raining—the sprinkler state and rain
state are independent. But given that the grass is wet, knowing the
sprinkler is off tells you it must be raining—the sprinkler state and rain
state are conditionally dependent, given the state of the grass.
In this case “wet grass” is a collider: an effect with at least
two independent causes. Colliders are interesting because
they illustrate how causal variables can be independent but
then become dependent if we condition on a shared effect
variable. In conditional independence terms, the parent
causes are independent (sprinkler ⊥ rain) but become
dependent after we observe (condition on) the child
(sprinkler ⟂̷ rain | wet grass).
For another example, let’s look at blood type again, as
shown in figure 4.3.

Figure 4.3 Mothers and fathers are usually unrelated, so knowing
mother’s blood type can’t help predict the father’s blood type. But if we
know the mother’s blood type and the child’s blood type, it narrows
down the possible blood types of the father.
If we assume the mother and father are unrelated, the
mother’s blood type tells us nothing about the father’s blood
type—(mother’s blood type ⊥ father’s blood type). But
suppose we know the child’s blood type is B. Does that help
us use the mother’s blood type to predict the father’s blood
type?
To answer this, examine the standard blood type table in
figure 4.4. We see that if mother has blood type A and the
child has blood type B, then possibly blood types for the
father are B and AB.
Figure 4.4 Knowing the mother’s blood type can help you narrow down
the father’s blood type if you know the child’s blood type.

Knowing the mother’s blood type alone doesn’t tell us
anything about the father’s blood type. But if we add
information about the child’s blood type (the collider), we
can narrow down the father’s blood type from four to two
possibilities. In other words, (mother’s blood type ⊥ father’s
blood type), but the mother’s and father’s blood type
become dependent once we condition on the child’s blood
type.
Colliders show up in various parts of causal inference. In
section 4.6, we’ll see that colliders are important in the task
of causal discovery, where we try to learn a causal DAG from
data. When we look at causal effects in chapters 7 and 11,
we’ll see how accidentally “adjusting for” colliders can
introduce unwanted “collider bias” when inferring causal
effects.
For now, we’ll note that colliders can be at odds with our
statistical intuition, because they describe how causal logic
leads to situations where two things are independent but
“suddenly” become dependent when you condition on a third
or more variables.

4.1.2 Abstracting independence with a causal
graph
Figure 4.5 In causal effect inference, we are interested in statistically
quantifying how much a cause (treatment) affects an effect (outcome).
Confounders are common causes that are a source of non-causal
correlation between treatment and outcome. Causal effect inference
requires “adjusting” for confounders. D-separation is the backbone of
the theory that tells us how.
In the previous section, we used the basic rules of blood type
heredity to show how causality induces conditional
independence. If we want to write code that can help us
make causal inferences across different domains, we’ll need
an abstraction for mapping causal relationships to
conditional independence that doesn’t rely on the rules of a
particular domain. “D-separation” solves this problem.
D-separation and d-connection refer to how we use graphs to
reason about conditional independence. The concepts are
novel at first glance, but they will be some of your most
important tools for graph-based causal reasoning. As a bit of
a spoiler for chapter 7, consider the problem of causal effect
inference, illustrated in figure 4.5. In causal inference, you
are interested in statistically quantifying how much a cause
(often called a “treatment”) affects an effect (an “outcome”).

As you saw in chapter 3, you can describe variables in a DAG
in terms of their role in a causal inference task. One role in
the task of causal effect inference is the confounder.
Confounders are common causes that are a source of non-
causal correlation between the treatment and the effect. To
estimate the causal effect of the treatment on the outcome,
we have to “adjust” for the confounder. The theoretical
justification for doing so is based on “d-separating” the path
{treatment ← confounder → outcome} and zooming in on the
path {treatment → outcome}.
4.2 D-separation and conditional
independence
Recall the following ideas from previous chapters:
A causal DAG is a model of the data generating process
(DGP).
The DGP entails a joint probability distribution.
Causal 
relationships 
induce 
independence 
and
conditional independence between variables in the joint
probability distribution.
D-separation and d-connection are graphical abstractions for
reasoning about the conditional independence in the joint
probability distribution that a causal DAG models. The
concept refers to nodes and paths between nodes in the
causal DAG; the nodes and paths are “d-connected” or “d-
separated,” where the “d” stands for “directional.” The idea
is for a statement like “these nodes are d-separated in the
graph” to correspond to a statement like “these variables are
conditionally independent.” D-separation is not about stating
what causes what; it is about whether paths between
variables in the DAG indicate the absence or presence of

dependence between those variables in the joint probability
distribution.
We want to make this correspondence because reasoning
about graphs is easier than reasoning about probability
distributions directly; tracing paths between nodes is easier
than taking graduate-level classes in probability theory. Also,
recall from chapter 2 that graphs are fundamental to
algorithms and data structures, and that statistical modeling
benefits from making conditional independence
assumptions.
4.2.1 D-separation: A gateway to simplified
causal analysis
Suppose we have a statement that U and V are conditionally
independent given Z (i.e., U⊥V  |Z ). Our task is to define a
corresponding statement purely in graphical terms. We’ll
write this statement as U⊥GV  |Z and read it as “U and V are
d-separated by Z in graph G.”
Let Z represent a set of nodes called the d-separating set or
“blockers.” In terms of conditional independence, Z
corresponds to a set of variables we condition on. Our goal is
to define d-separation such that the nodes in Z in some
sense “block” the dependence between U and V that is
implied by the causal structure of our DAG.
Next, let P be a path, meaning a series of connected edges
(and nodes) between two nodes. It does not matter if the
nodes on the paths are observed or not in your data (we’ll
see how the data factors in later). Our definition of “path”
does not depend on the orientation of the edges; for
example, {x → y → z }, {x ← y → z }, {x ← y ← z }, and {x → y
← z } are all paths between x and z.

Finally, let’s revisit the collider. A collider structure refers to a
motif like x → y ← z where the middle node y (the collider)
has incoming edges.
We’ll define d-separation now. First, two nodes u and v are
said to be d-separated (blocked) by Z if all paths between
them are d-separated by Z. If any of those paths between u
and v are not d-separated, then u and v are d-connected.
Let’s define d-separation for a path. A path P is d-separated
by node set Z if any of four criteria are met.
1. P contains a chain, i → m → j, such that the middle node
m is in Z.
2. P contains a chain, i ← m ← j, such that the middle node
m is in Z.
3. P contains a child-parent-child structure i ← m → j, such
that the middle (parent) node m is in Z.
Let’s pause. Criteria 1–3 are just walking through the ways
we can orient edges between three nodes. If this keeps up,
then P is always d-separated if a node on P is in set Z. That
would be nice, because it would mean that two nodes are d-
connected (i.e., dependent) if there are any paths between
them in the DAG, and they are d-separated if all those paths
are blocked by nodes in set Z.
Unfortunately, colliders make the fourth criterion contrary to
the others:
This fourth criterion is how d-separation captures the way
two independent (d-separated) items can become dependent
when conditioning on a collider.
P contains a collider structure, i → m ← j, such that the
middle node m is not in Z, and no descendant of m is in
Z.
4.

Many writers conflate d-separation and conditional
independence. Keep the distinction clear in your mind: ⊥G
speaks of graphs, whereas ⊥ speaks of distributions. It
matters because, as you’ll see later in this chapter, we’ll use
d-separation to test our causal assumptions against
statistical evidence of conditional independence in the data.
Figure 4.6 Does the set {m, k} d-separate path u → i → m → j → v?
Let’s work through a few examples.
EXAMPLE WITH CHAIN I → M → J
Consider the DAG in figure 4.6, where P is u → i → m → j → v.
This path is d-connected by default. Now let Z be the set {m,
k}. P contains a chain i → m → j, and m is in Z. If we block on
Z, the first criterion is satisfied, and u and v are d-separated.

For some (but not all), a helpful analogy for understanding d-
separation is an electronic circuit. Paths without colliders are
d-connected and are like closed circuits, where electrical
current flows uninhibited. “Blocking” on a node on that path
d-separates the path and will “break the circuit” so current
can’t flow. Blocking on Z (specifically, blocking on m, which is
in Z) “breaks the circuit” as shown in figure 4.7.
Figure 4.7 The path is d-connected by default, but blocking on m ∈ Z d-
separates the path and figuratively breaks the circuit (“∈” means “in”).
EXAMPLE WITH CHAIN I ← M → J
Now consider the DAG in figure 4.8, where P is u ← i ← m → j
→ v. This path is also d-connected by default. Note that d-
connection can go against the grain of causality. In figure
4.7, the d-connected path from u to v takes steps in the
direction of causality: u to i (u ← i), then i to m (i ← m), then
m to j (m → j), and then j to v (j → v). But here, we have two
anticausal (meaning against the direction of causality) steps,
namely the step from u to i (u ← i) and i to m (i ← m).

Figure 4.8 Does the set {m} d-separate path u ← i ← m → j → v?
Suppose we block on set Z, and Z contains only the node m.
Then condition 3 is satisfied and the path is d-separated, as
illustrated in figure 4.9.
Figure 4.9 This path from u to v is also d-connected by default, even
though it has some steps (u to i and i to m) that go against the direction
of causality. Again, blocking on m ∈ Z d-separates the path and
figuratively breaks the circuit.
COLLIDERS MAKE D-SEPARATION WEIRD
The fourth criterion focuses on the collider motif i → m ← j: P
contains a collider structure, i → m ← j, such that the middle
node m is not in Z, and no descendant of m is in Z.
Let’s relate this back to our blood type example. Here i and j
are the parents’ blood types and m is the child’s blood type.
We saw that colliders are a bit odd, because conditioning on

the collider (the child’s blood type) induces dependence
between two independent things (like the parents’ blood
types). This oddness makes d-separation a bit tricky to
understand at first glance. Figure 4.10 illustrates how
colliders affect d-separation.
Figure 4.10 Colliders make d-connection tricky. Given a node m on a
path, if m is not a collider, the path is d-connected by default and d-
separated when you block on m. If m is a collider, the path is d-
separated by default and d-connected when you block on m.
The following is true of colliders:
All paths between two nodes d-connect by default unless
that path has a collider motif. A path with a collider is d-
separated by default.
Blocking with any node on a d-connected path will d-
separate that path unless that node is a collider.
Blocking on a collider will d-connect a path by default, as
will blocking with a descendant of that collider.

Figure 4.11 Does the set {m} (or {k} or {m, k}) d-separate path u → i →
m ← j → v?
In terms of the circuit analogy, colliders are like an open
switch, which prevents current flow in an electronic circuit.
When a path has a collider, the collider stops all current from
passing through it. Colliders break the circuit. Blocking on a
collider is like closing the switch, and the current that
couldn’t pass through before now can pass through (d-
connection).
In the DAG in figure 4.11, is the path u → i → m ← j → v d-
connected by default? No, because the path contains a
collider structure m (i → m ← j).
Now consider what would happen if the blocking set Z
included m. In this case, condition 4 is violated and the path
becomes d-connected, as in figure 4.12.

Figure 4.12 This path from u to v is d-separated by default because it
contains a collider m. The collider is analogous to an open circuit.
Blocking on m or any of its descendants d-connects the path and
figuratively closes the circuit.
The path would also become d-connected if Z didn’t have m
but just had k (or if Z included both m and k). Blocking on a
descendant of a collider d-connects in the same manner as
blocking on a collider.
Can you guess why? It’s because the collider’s descendant is
d-connected to the collider. In causal terms, we saw how,
given a mother’s blood type, observing the child’s blood type
(the collider) might reveal the father’s blood type. Suppose
that if instead of observing the child’s blood type, we
observed the child’s child’s blood type (call it the
grandchild’s blood type). That grandchild’s blood type could
help narrow down the child’s blood type and thus narrow
down the father’s blood type. In other words, if the mother’s
and father’s blood types are dependent, given the child’s
blood type, and the grandchild’s blood type gives you
information about the child’s blood type, then the mother’s
and father’s blood types are dependent given the
grandchild’s blood type.
D-SEPARATION AND SETS OF NODES
D-separation doesn’t just apply to pairs of nodes, it applies
to pairs of sets of nodes. In the notation u⊥v |Z, Z can be a
set of blockers, and u and v can be sets as well. We d-
separate two sets by blocking all d-connected paths between
members of each set. Other graph-based causal ideas, such

as the do-calculus, also generalize to sets of nodes. If you
remember that fact, we can build intuition on individual
nodes, and that intuition will generalize to sets.
When the blocking set Z is the singleton set {m}, this set is
sufficient to block the paths u → i → m → j → v in figure 4.7
and u ← i ← m → j → v in figure 4.8. Altogether, the sets {i },
{m }, {j }, {i, m }, {i, j }, {m, j }, and {i, m, j } all d-separate
u and v on these two paths. However, {i }, {m }, and {j } are
the minimal d-separating sets, meaning that all the other d-
separating sets include at least one of these sets. The
minimal d-separation sets are sufficient to d-separate the
two nodes. When reasoning about d-separation and when
implementing it in algorithms, we want to focus on finding
minimal d-separating sets; if U⊥V|Z and U⊥V|Z, W are both
true, we don’t want to waste effort on U⊥V|Z, W.
4.2.2 Examples of d-separating multiple paths
Suppose we want to d-separate two nodes. Often there are
multiple d-connected paths between those nodes. To d-
separate those nodes, we need to find blockers that d-
separate each of those paths. Let’s walk through some
examples.
FINDING A MINIMAL D-SEPARATING SET
In a bigger graph with more edges, the number of paths
between two nodes can be quite large. But often longer
paths often get blocked as a side-effect of blocking shorter
paths. So we can start with shorter paths, and work our way
to longer paths that haven’t been blocked yet, until no
unblocked paths remain.
For example, U and V are d-connected in figure 4.13. What
sets of nodes are fully required to d-separate them?

In figure 4.13, U and V are d-connected through these paths:
U → I → V
U → J → V
U → J → I → V
First, we can d-separate U → I → V by blocking on I. Then, we
d-separate U → J → V by blocking on J. At this point, we see
that our blocking set {I, J  } already d-separates U → J → I →
V, so we are done.
In another example, how do we d-separate U and V in figure
4.14?
Figure 4.13 We can d-separate U and V with {I, J}.

Figure 4.14 We can d-separate U and V with sets {I, M, K, J} or {I, M, K,
L}.
There are many paths between U and V. Let’s first
enumerate three of the shortest paths:
U ← I → V
U ← M → V
U ← K → V
We’ll need to block on at least on {I, M, K} to d-separate
these three paths. Note that U has another parent J, and
there are several paths from U to V through J, but there are
only two paths we haven’t already d-separated; U ← J → L →
V and U ← J → K ← L → V. Both J and L will block these paths,
so we could d-separate U and V with minimal sets {I, M, K, J}
or {I, M, K, L}. Note that U ← J → K ← L → V was d-connected
because we initially added K, a collider on this path, to our

blocking set. Next, we look at another example of this
phenomenon.
WHEN D-SEPARATING ONE PATH D-CONNECTS
ANOTHER
When you attempt to d-separate a path between U and V by
blocking on a node that is a collider on another path, you
potentially d-connect that other path. That is fine, as long as
you take additional steps to d-separate that path as well. To
illustrate, consider the graph in figure 4.15. This graph is
simple enough that we can enumerate all of the paths.
Figure 4.15 Blocking with M will block the path U ← M → V but would d-
connect the path U ← I → M ← J → V because M is a collider between I and
J. So we need to additionally block on either I or J to d-separate U ← I →
M ← J → V.
Let’s start with the three d-connecting paths:
U ← M → V
U ← I → M → V
U ← M ← J → V

We also have a path U ← I → M ← J → V, but that is not a d-
connecting path because M is a collider on that path.
The easiest way to block all three of these d-connected paths
with one node is to block on M. However, if we block on that
collider, the path U ← I → M ← J → V d-connects. So we need
to additionally block on I or J. In other words, our minimal d-
separating sets are {I, M } and { J, M }.
4.2.3 D-separation in code
Don’t fret if you are still hazy on d-separation. We’ve defined
four criteria for describing paths between nodes on a graph,
which is just the sort of thing we can implement in a graph
library. In Python, the graph library NetworkX already has a
utility that checks for d-separation. You can experiment with
these tools to build an intuition for d-separation on different
graphs.
SETTING UP YOUR ENVIRONMENT
This code was written with pgmpy version 0.1.24. The
pandas version was 2.0.3.
Let’s verify our d-separation analysis of the causal DAG
shown previously in figure 4.15.

Listing 4.1 D-separation analysis of the DAG in figure 4.15
from networkx import is_d_separator      #1
from pgmpy.base import DAG     #2
dag = DAG([     #2
    ('I', 'U'),     #2
    ('I', 'M'),     #2
    ('M', 'U'),  #2
    ('J', 'V'),    #2
    ('J', 'M'),     #2
    ('M', 'V')     #2
])     #2
print(is_d_separator(dag, {"U"}, {"V"}, {"M"}))     #3
print(is_d_separator(dag, {"U"}, {"V"}, {"M", "I", "J"}))    #4
print(is_d_separator(dag, {"U"}, {"V"}, {"M", "I"}))     #5
print(is_d_separator(dag, {"U"}, {"V"}, {"M", "J"}))    #5
#1 The graph library NetworkX implements the d-separation algorithm
for NetworkX graph objects, such as ΔiGraph (directed graph).
#2 ΔAG is a base class for the BayesianNetwork class. The base class for
ΔAG is NetworkX’s ΔiGraph. So is_d_separator will work on objects of
the class ΔAG (and BayesianNetwork).
#3 Build the graph in figure 4.11. Blocking on a collider M blocks the
path U ← M → V but will d-connect the path U ← I → M ← J → V, so this will
print False.
#4 Blocking on M will block U ← M → V and open (d-connect) U ← I → M ←
J → V, but we can block that path with I and J, so this evaluates to True.
#5 Blocking on both I and J is overkill. The minimal d-separating sets
are {“M”, “I”} and {“M”, “J”}.
pgmpy also has a get_independencies method in the DAG class
that enumerates minimal d-separating states that are true
given a graph.
Listing 4.2 Enumerating d-separations in pgmpy
from pgmpy.base import DAG
dag = DAG([
    ('I', 'U'),
    ('I', 'M'),
    ('M', 'U'),
    ('J', 'V'),
    ('J', 'M'),
    ('M', 'V')
])
dag.get_independencies()    #1
#1 Obtain all the minimal d-separation statements that are true in the
ΔAG.
The get_independencies method returns the following results.
(You might see a slight difference in the ordering of the

output depending on your environment.)
(I ⊥ J)
(I ⊥ V | J, M)
(I ⊥ V | J, U, M)
(V ⊥ I, U | J, M)
(V ⊥ U | I, M)
(V ⊥ I | J, U, M)
(V ⊥ U | J, M, I)
(J ⊥ I)
(J ⊥ U | I, M)
(J ⊥ U | I, M, V)
(U ⊥ V | J, M)
(U ⊥ J, V | I, M)
(U ⊥ V | J, M, I)
(U ⊥ J | I, M, V)
Note that the get_independencies function name is a
misnomer; it does not “get independencies”; it gets d-
separations. Again, don’t conflate d-separation in the causal
graph with conditional independence in the joint probability
distribution entailed by the DGP the graph is meant to
model. Keeping this distinction in your mind will help you
with the next task: using d-separation to test a DAG against
evidence of conditional independence in the data.
4.3 Refuting a causal DAG
We have seen how to build a causal DAG. Of course, we want
to find a causal model that fits the data well, so now we’ll
evaluate the causal DAG against the data. We could use
standard goodness-of-fit and predictive statistics to evaluate
fit, but here we’re going to focus on refuting our causal DAG,
using data to show that our model is wrong.
Statistical models fit curves and patterns in the data. There
is no “right” statistical model; there are just models that fit
the data well. In contrast, causal models go beyond the data
to make causal assertions about the DGP, and those
assertions are either true or false. As modelers of causality,
we try to find a model that fits well, but we also try to refute
our model’s causal assertions.

REFUTATION AND POPPER
The approach to building DAGs by refutation aligns with
Karl Popper’s falsifiable theories framework. Karl Popper
was a 20th-century philosopher known for his contributions
to the philosophy of science, particularly his theory of
falsification. Popper argued that scientific theories cannot
be proven true, but they can be tested and potentially
falsified, or in other words, refuted.
We take a “Popperesque” approach to model building,
meaning that we don’t merely want to find a model that
fits the evidence. Rather, we actively search for evidence
that refutes our model. When we find it, we reject our
model, build a better one, and repeat.
D-separation is our first tool for refutation. Suppose you build
a causal DAG and it implies conditional independence. You
then look for evidence in the data of dependence, where
your DAG says there should be conditional independence. If
you find that evidence, you have refuted your DAG. You then
go back and iterate on the causal DAG, until you can no
longer refute it, given your data.
Once you’ve done that, you move on to your downstream
causal inference workflow. But keep this refutation mentality
in mind. If you work with the same causal DAG repeatedly,
you should always be seeking new ways to refute and iterate
upon it. Practically, your goal is not getting the true DAG, but
getting a hard-to-refute DAG.
4.3.1 Revisiting the causal Markov property
Recall that we saw two aspects of the causal Markov
property:

Local 
Markov 
property —A 
node 
is 
conditionally
independent of its non-descendants, given its parents.
Markov factorization property —The joint probability
distribution factorizes into conditional distributions of
variables, given their direct parents in the causal DAG.
Now we’ll introduce a third face of this property called the
global Markov property. This property states that d-
separation in the causal DAG implies conditional
independence in the joint probability distribution. In notation,
we write
In plain words, that notation reads as “If U and V are d-
separated by Z in graph G, they are conditionally
independent given Z.” Note that if any of the three facets of
the causal Markov property are true, they are all true.
The global Markov property gives us a straightforward way to
refute our causal model. We can use d-separations to specify
statistical tests for the presence of conditional
independence. Failing tests refute the model.
4.3.2 Refutation using conditional
independence tests
There are multiple ways to statistically evaluate conditional
independence, and the most obvious is with a statistical test
for conditional independence. pgmpy and other libraries
make it relatively easy to run conditional independence
tests. Let’s revisit the transportation model, shown again in
figure 4.16.

Figure 4.16 The transportation model. Age (A) and gender (S) determine
education (E). Education causes occupation (O) and residence (R).
Occupation and residence cause transportation (T).
Recall that for our transportation model we were able to
collect the following observations:
Age (A) —Recorded as young (“young”) for individuals up
to and including 29 years, adult (“adult”) for individuals
from 30 to 60 years old (inclusive), and old (“old”) for
people 61 and over.
Gender (S) —The self-reported gender of an individual,
recorded as male (“M”), female (“F”), or other (“O”).
Education (E) —The highest level of education or training
completed by the individual, recorded as either high
school (“high”) or university degree (“uni”).
Occupation (O) —Employee (“emp”) or a self-employed
worker (“self”).

Residence (R) —The population size of the city the
individual lives in, recorded as small (“small”) or big
(“big”).
Travel (T) —The means of transport favored by the
individual, recorded as car (“car”), train (“train”), or
other (“other”).
In the graph, E ⊥G T | O, R. So let’s test the conditional
independence statement E ⊥ T | O, R. Statistical hypothesis
tests have a null hypothesis (denoted H0) and an alternative
hypothesis (denoted Ha). For statistical hypothesis tests of
conditional independence, it is standard that the null
hypothesis H0 is the hypothesis of conditional independence,
and Ha is the hypothesis that the variables are not
conditionally independent.
A statistical hypothesis test uses the N data points of
observed values of U, V, and Z (from an exploratory dataset)
to calculate a statistic. The following code loads the
transportation data. After loading, it creates two DataFrames,
one with all the data and one with just the first 30 rows so
we can see how sample size affects the significance test.
Listing 4.3 Loading the transportation data
import pandas as pd
survey_url = "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/altdeep/causalML/master
[CA] /datasets/transportation_survey.csv"
fulldata = pd.read_csv(survey_url)
data = fulldata[0:30]     #1
print(data[0:5])
#1 Subsetting the data to only 30 datapoints for explanation
The line print(data[0:5]) prints the first five rows of the
DataFrame.

       A  S     E    O      R      T
0  adult  F  high  emp  small  train
1  young  M  high  emp    big    car
2  adult  M   uni  emp    big  other
3    old  F   uni  emp    big    car
4  young  F   uni  emp    big    car
Most conditional independence testing libraries will
implement frequentist hypothesis tests. These tests will
conclude in favor of H0 or Ha depending on whether a given
statistic falls above or below a certain threshold.
“Frequentist,” in this context, means that the statistic
produced by the test is called a p-value, and the threshold is
called a significance level, which by convention is usually .05
or .01.
The test favors the null hypothesis H0 of conditional
independence if the p-value falls above the significance
threshold and the alternative hypothesis Ha if it falls below
the threshold. This frequentist approach is an optimization
that guarantees the significance level is an upper bound on
the chances of concluding in favor of dependence when E
and T are actually conditionally independent.
Most software libraries provide conditional independence
testing utilities that make specific mathematical assumptions
when calculating a p-value. For example, we can run a
specific conditional independence test that derives a test
statistic that theoretically follows the chi-squared probability
distribution, and then use this assumption to derive a p-
value. The following code runs the test.

Listing 4.4 Chi-squared test of conditional independence
from pgmpy.estimators.CITests import chi_square     #1
significance = .05     #2
result = chi_square(    #3
    X="E", Y="T", Z=["O", "R"],     #3
    data=data,     #3
    boolean=False,   #3
    significance_level=significance     #3
)     #3
print(result)
#1 Import the chi_square test function.
#2 Set the significance level to .05.
#3 When the boolean argument is set to False, the test returns a tuple
of three elements. The first two are the chi-square statistic and the
corresponding p-value of 0.56. The last element is a chi-squares
distribution parameter called degrees of freedom, which is needed to
calculate the p-value.
This prints the tuple (1.1611111111111112, 0.5595873983053805,
2), where the values are chi-squared test statistic, p-value,
and degrees of freedom respectively. The p-value is greater
than the significance level, so this test favors the null
hypothesis of conditional independence. In other words, this
particular test did not offer falsifying evidence against our
model.
We can jump directly to the result of the test by setting the
chi_square function’s boolean argument to True. The function
will then return True if the p-value is greater than the
significance value (favoring conditional independence) and
False otherwise (favoring dependence).

Listing 4.5 Chi-squared test with Boolean outcome
from pgmpy.estimators.CITests import chi_square     #1
significance = .05     #2
result = chi_square(     #3
    X="E", Y="T", Z=["O", "R"],   #3
    data=data,    #3
    boolean=True,    #3
    significance_level=significance  #3   
)    #3
print(result)
#1 Import the chi_square test function.
#2 Set the significance level to .05.
#3 When the boolean argument is set to True, the test returns a simple
True or False outcome. It will return True if the p-value is greater than
the significance value, which favors conditional independence. It
returns False otherwise, favoring dependence.
This prints the result True. Now let’s iterate through all the d-
separation statements we can derive from the transportation
graph, and test them one by one. The following script will
print each d-separation statement along with the outcome of
the corresponding conditional independence test.

Listing 4.6 Run a chi-squared test for each d-separation statement
from pprint import pprint
from pgmpy.base import DAG
from pgmpy.independencies import IndependenceAssertion
dag = DAG([
    ('A', 'E'),
    ('S', 'E'),
    ('E', 'O'),
    ('E', 'R'),
    ('O', 'T'),
    ('R', 'T')
])
dseps = dag.get_independencies()    
def test_dsep(dsep):
    test_outputs = []
    for X in list(dsep.get_assertion()[0]):
        for Y in list(dsep.get_assertion()[1]):
            Z = list(dsep.get_assertion()[2])
            test_result = chi_square(
                X=X, Y=Y, Z=Z,
                data=data,
                boolean=True,
                significance_level=significance
            )
            assertion = IndependenceAssertion(X, Y, Z)
            test_outputs.append((assertion, test_result))
    return test_outputs
results = [test_dsep(dsep) for dsep in dseps.get_assertions()]
results = dict([item for sublist in results for item in sublist])
pprint(results)
The result is a list of d-separation statements and whether
the evidence in the data supports (or fails to refute) that
statement.
{(O ⊥ A | R, E, T, S): True,
 (S ⊥ R | E, T, A): True,
 (S ⊥ O | E, T, A): True,
 (T ⊥ S | R, O, A): True,
 (S ⊥ O | R, E): True,
 (R ⊥ O | E): False,
 (S ⊥ O | E, A): True,
 (S ⊥ R | E, A): True,
 (S ⊥ R | E, T, O, A): True,
 (S ⊥ R | E, O, A): True,
 (O ⊥ A | E, T): True,
 (S ⊥ O | R, E, T): True,
 (R ⊥ O | E, S): False, 
 …
 (T ⊥ A | E, S): True}
We can count the number of tests that pass.

Listing 4.7 Calculate the proportion of d-separations with passing tests
num_pass = sum(results.values())
num_dseps = len(dseps.independencies)
num_fail = num_dseps - num_pass
print(num_fail / num_dseps)
Here we get 0.2875. This implies that 29% of the d-
separations lack corresponding evidence of conditional
independence in the data.
This number seems high, but as we’ll see in section 4.4, this
statistic depends on the size of the data and other factors.
We’ll want to compare it to the result for other candidate
DAGs. For now, the next step is to inspect these cases of
apparent dependence where our DAG says there should be
conditional independence. If the evidence of dependence is
strong, we need to think about how to improve our causal
DAG to explain it.
Earlier, I used the chi_square function, which constructs a
specific test statistic with a chi-squared test distribution—the
distribution used to calculate the p-value. The chi-squared
distribution is just another canonical distribution, like the
normal or Bernoulli distributions. The chi-squared distribution
comes up frequently for discrete variables, because there
are several test statistics in the discrete setting that either
have a chi-squared distribution or get closer to one as the
size of the data increases. Overall, independence tests have
a variety of test statistics with different test distributions.
pgmpy provides several options by way of calls to SciPy’s
stats library.
One common concern is that the test makes strong
assumptions. For example, some conditional independence
tests between continuous variables assume any dependence
between the variables would be linear. An alternative
approach is to use a permutation test, which is an algorithm
that constructs the p -value without relying on a canonical

test distribution. Permutation tests make fewer assumptions
but are computationally expensive.
4.3.3 Some tests are more important than
others
The previous analysis tested all the d-separations implied by
a causal DAG. But some d-separations might be more
important to you than others. Some dependence relations
and conditional independence relations are pivotal to a
downstream causal inference analysis, while others don’t
affect that analysis at all.
For example, consider figure 4.17, which we looked at earlier
in section 3.3. We added the variable Z to the graph because
we might want to use it as an “instrumental variable” in the
estimation of the causal effect.

Figure 4.17 Z, X0, and X1 were included in the DAG because they play a
useful role in analyzing the causal effect of U on Y. Their role depends
on conditional independence, and it is important to test that they can
indeed serve those roles.
We’ll discuss instrumental variables in depth in chapter 11.
For now, suffice it to say that for Z to be an instrument, it
must be independent of W0, W1, and W2. So we’d pay special
attention to testing that assumption.
4.4 Caveats with conditional
independence testing
As I mentioned, conditional independence tests are perhaps
the most obvious way to test the conditional independence
constraints implied by your proposed causal DAG. However,
there are several caveats with using statistical tests to test a
causal DAG. In my experience, these issues can distract
analysts from their ultimate goal of answering a causal
question. In this section, I’ll highlight some of these caveats

and propose some alternatives to conditional independence
testing. The main takeaway is that statistical testing is an
important tool for building your DAG, but as with any
statistical methodology, it is not a panacea (and that’s fine).
4.4.1 Statistical tests always have some chance
of error
I mentioned that with d-separation, we should not “confuse
the map for the terrain”; d-separation is not the same thing
as conditional independence. Rather, if your model is a good
representation of causality, d-separation implies conditional
independence.
Similarly, conditional independence is not the same as
statistical evidence of conditional independence. The causal
structure of the DGP imposes conditional independence
constraints on the joint probability distribution. But you can’t
“see” the joint distribution and the independencies it
contains; you can only “see” (and run statistical tests on) the
data sampled from that distribution.
Just like with prediction, classification, or any other statistical
pattern recognition procedure, the procedure for detecting
these independencies in data can get it wrong. You can get
false negatives, where a pair of variables are truly
conditionally independent but the statistical independence
test concludes they are dependent. You can have false
positives, where a statistical independence test finds a pair
of variables to be conditionally independent when they are
not.

4.4.2 Testing causal DAGs with traditional CI
tests is flawed
I say that the proposed conditional independence tests for
refutation are “flawed” because they violate the spirit of
statistical hypothesis testing in science. Suppose you think
you have discovered some pattern in stock prices. You are
biased to think the pattern is more than coincidence
because, if it is, you can make money. To be rigorous and not
fall prey to your biases, your alternative hypothesis says the
pattern is real and exploitable, whereas the null hypothesis is
that it is just random noise. The frequentist test assumes the
null hypothesis is true and gives you a p -value, which
quantifies the chances that random noise could form a
pattern at least as strong as the one you found. The test
forces you to reject the pattern as real unless that p -value is
really small. Most mainstream statistical testing libraries are
designed for this use case.
When you propose a causal model, you are also biased to
believe it is true. But causal models induce conditional
independences, which by definition are the absences of
patterns. In this case the null and alternative hypotheses
should switch; the alternative should be that your model is
right and there isn’t a pattern (and any evidence of patterns
in the data is just spurious correlation), and the null should
be that there is a pattern. It is possible to implement such a
hypothesis test, but it is not mathematically trivial, and most
mainstream statistical libraries like SciPy do not support this
use case.
The compromise is using the traditional tests, where the null
hypothesis specifies conditional independence less as a
theoretically rigorous analysis and more as a heuristic —an
empirical problem solving technique that can be suboptimal
but sufficient to reach a good enough solution.

4.4.3 p-values vary with the size of the data
The conclusion of a traditional conditional independence test
depends on a significance threshold. If the p -value falls
below this threshold, you favor dependence, and if it falls
above, you favor conditional independence. The choice of
threshold is a bit arbitrary; people tend to go with commonly
selected values like .1 or .05 or .01.
The problem is that the p -value statistic varies with the size
of the data. All else equal, as the size of the data increases,
the p-value decreases. In other words, the larger the data,
the more that things start to look dependent. If you have a
large dataset, it is more likely that p -values will fall below
that arbitrary threshold, and the data will look like it’s
refuting the conditional independence implied by your DAG,
even when that conditional independence is true.
To illustrate, the test of E ⊥ T | O, R in section 4.3.2 had 30
data points and produced a p-value of 0.56. In our data, E ⊥
T | O, R is ground truth (via simulation), so if a test concludes
against E ⊥ T | O, R, it is because of statistical issues with
the test, not the quality of the data. The following bootstrap
statistical analysis will show how the estimate of the p-value
falls as the size of the data increases.
First, we’ll write a sample_p_value function that samples a p-
value for a given data size. The next function,
estimate_p_value, will do this sampling repeatedly and
calculate a mean p -value, a 90% confidence interval, and
the probability that the p -value falls below the significance
threshold, which is the probability of rejecting the correct
conclusion that E ⊥ T | O, R.

Listing 4.8 Bootstrap analysis of sensitivity of test of E ⊥ T | O, R to
sample size
from numpy import mean, quantile
def sample_p_val(data_size, data, alpha):     #1
    bootstrap_data = data.sample(n=data_size, replace=True)    #1
    result = chi_square(    #1
        X="E", Y="T", Z=["O", "R"],    #1
        data=bootstrap_data,     #1
        boolean=False,     #1
        significance_level = alpha     #1
    )    #1
    p_val = result[1]    #1
    return p_val     #1
def estimate_p_val(data_size, data=fulldata, boot_size=1000, α=.05):    #2
    samples = [  #2
        sample_p_val(data_size, data=fulldata, alpha=α)  #2
        for _ in range(boot_size)     #2
    ]    #2
    positive_tests = [p_val > significance for p_val in samples]    #3
    prob_conclude = mean(positive_tests)    #4
    p_estimate = mean(samples)    #4
    quantile_05, quantile_95 = quantile(samples, [.05, .95])    #5
    lower_error = p_estimate - quantile_05     #5
    higher_error = quantile_95 - p_estimate    #5
    return p_estimate, lower_error, higher_error, prob_conclude
data_size = range(30, 1000, 20)     #6
result = list(zip(*[estimate_p_val(size) for size in data_size]))  #6
#1 Given a certain data size, this function randomly samples that
number of rows from the full dataset. It then runs the chi-squared
independence test and returns the p-value.
#2 This function conducts a “bootstrap” procedure that samples 1,000
p-values for a given data size and calculates the mean p-value and 90%
p-value confidence interval.
#3 Calculate the probability of a test concluding in favor of conditional
independence.
#4 Calculate the mean of the p-values to get the bootstrap mean.
#5 Calculate the 5th and 95th percentiles to get a 90% bootstrap
confidence interval.
#6 Run the bootstrap analysis.
Finally, we’ll visualize the results. We’ll plot the size of the
data against the mean and 90% confidence intervals for the
p-values we get for that given data size. We’ll also plot how
the probability of concluding in favor of the true hypothesis
(E ⊥ T | O, R ) for a significance level of .05 depends on data
size.

Listing 4.9 Visualize dependence of conditional independence testing on
data size
import numpy as np
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
p_vals, lower_bars, higher_bars, probs_conclude_indep = result    #1
plt.title('Data size vs. p-value (Ind. of E & T | O & R)')     #2
plt.xlabel("Number of examples in data")     #2
plt.ylabel("Expected p-value")   #2
error_bars = np.array([lower_bars, higher_bars])    #2
plt.errorbar(   #2
    data_size,    #2
    p_vals,     #2
    yerr=error_bars,    #2
    ecolor="grey",    #2
    elinewidth=.5   #2
)     #2
plt.hlines(significance, 0, 1000, linestyles="dashed")     #2
plt.show()
plt.title('Probability of favoring independence given data size')    #3
plt.xlabel("Number of examples in data")     #3
plt.ylabel("Probability of test favoring conditional independence")    #3
plt.plot(data_size, probs_conclude_indep)  #3
#1 Run the bootstrap analysis to get quantiles of p-values and
probability of concluding in favor of independence.
#2 Plot the data size vs. p-value. At larger data sizes, the expected p-
value falls below a threshold.
#3 Plot data size vs. the probability of concluding in favor of
independence, given .05 significance.
Figure 4.18 shows the first plot. The descending curve is the
expected p-values at different data sizes, the vertical lines
are error bars showing a 90% bootstrap confidence interval.
By the time we get to a dataset of size 1,000, the expected
p-value is below the threshold, meaning that the test favors
the conclusion that E ⊥ T | O, R is false.


Figure 4.18 Sample size vs. expected p-value of the conditional
independence test for E ⊥ T | O, R (solid line). The vertical lines are the
error bars; they show the 90% bootstrap confidence intervals. The
horizontal dashed line is a .05 significance level, above which we favor
the null hypothesis of conditional independence and below which we
reject it. As the sample size increases, we eventually cross the line.
Thus, the result of our refutation analysis depends on the size of the
data.
Note that the lower bound of the confidence interval crosses
the significance threshold well before 1,000, suggesting that
at even lower data sizes, we have a good chance of rejecting
the true conclusion of E ⊥ T | O, R. This becomes clearer in
figure 4.19, where the probability of concluding in favor of
the true conclusion decreases as the size of the data
increases.


Figure 4.19 As the size of the data increases, the probability of
concluding in favor of this (true) instance of the conditional
independence relation E ⊥ T | O, R decreases.
You might think that as the size of the data increases, the
algorithm is detecting subtle dependencies between E and T
that were undetectable with less data. Not so, for this
transportation data is simulated in such a way that E ⊥ T | O,
R is definitely true. This is a case where more data leads us
to rejecting independence because more data leads to more
spurious correlations—patterns that aren’t really there.
A causal model is either right or wrong about causality in the
DGP it describes. The conditional independence the model
implies is either there or it’s not. Yet if that conditional
independence is there, the test can still conclude in favor of
dependence when the data is arbitrarily large.
Again, if we view conditional independence testing as a
heuristic for refuting our DAG, then this sensitivity to the size
of the data shouldn’t upset us. Regardless of the data size
and the significance thresholds, the relative differences
between p-values when there is no conditional independence
and when there is will be large and obvious.
4.4.4 The problem of multiple comparisons
In statistical hypothesis testing, the more tests you run, the
more testing errors you rack up. The same is true when
running a test for each d-separation implied by a causal
DAG. In statistics, this problem is called the multiple
comparisons problem. There are solutions to dealing with
multiple comparisons problems, such as using false
discovery rates. If you are familiar with such methods,
applying them won’t hurt. If you want to learn more, see the
chapter’s notes at https://www.altdeep.ai/p/causalaibook for
references to false discovery rates in the context of causal

modeling. But again, I encourage you to view traditional
conditional independence testing as a heuristic that helps
with the ultimate goal of building a good causal DAG. Focus
on this goal and on the subsequent causal inference analysis
you will conduct using your DAG, and avoid rabbit holes of
statistical testing rigor.
4.4.5 Conditional independence testing
struggles in machine learning settings
Commonly used libraries for conditional independence
testing are generally limited to one-dimensional variables
with fairly simple patterns of correlation between them.
pgmpy’s conditional independence tests, which are imported
from SciPy, are no exception. In recent years, several
nonparametric tests have been developed for more nuanced
distributions, such as kernel-based conditional independence
tests. Tests in the PyWhy library PyWhy-Stats are a good
place to start if you are interested in such tests.
However, in machine learning, it is common for variables to
have more than one dimension such as vectors, matrices,
and tensors. For example, one variable in a causal DAG
might represent a matrix of pixels constituting an image.
Further, the statistical associations between these variables
can be nonlinear.
One solution is to focus on prediction. If two things are
independent, they have no ability to predict one another.
Suppose we have two predictive models M1 and M2. M1
predicts Y using Z as a predictor. M2 predicts Y using X and Z
as a predictor. Predictors can have dimensions greater than
one. If X ⊥ Y | Z, then any X has no predictive information
about Y beyond what is already provided by Z. So you can
test X ⊥ Y | Z by comparing the model predictive accuracy of
M2 to M1. When the models perform similarly, we have

evidence of conditional independence. Note that you’d want
to prevent M2 from “cheating” on its predictive accuracy by
taking steps to avoid overfitting—yet another way spurious
correlation can creep into our analysis.
4.4.6 Final thoughts
Conditional independence testing is an extensive and
nuanced subject. Your goal with this testing is to refute your
causal DAG, not to create the Platonic ideal of a conditional
independence testing suite. I recommend getting a testing
workflow that is good enough, and then focusing on building
your DAG and using that DAG in downstream causal
inferences. For example, if I had a mix of continuous and
discrete variables, then rather than implementing a test that
could accommodate my different data types, I would
discretize my continuous variables (for example, turning age
as time since birth into age brackets) and use a vanilla chi-
squared test, to keep things moving along.
4.5 Refuting a causal DAG given
latent variables
The method of testing DAGs with conditional independence
has a latent variable problem. If a variable in our causal DAG
is latent (not observed in the data), we can’t run any
conditional independence tests involving that variable. That
is a major problem; if a variable is an important part of the
DGP, we can’t exclude it from our DAG simply because we
can’t test independence assertions with that variable.
To illustrate, consider the causal DAG in figure 4.20. This
figure represents how smoking behavior (S ) is influenced
both by the cost of cigarettes (C  ) as well as genetic factors
(denoted D as in “DNA”) that make one more or less prone to

nicotine addiction. Those same genetic factors influence
one’s likelihood of getting lung cancer (L). In this model,
smoking’s effect on cancer is mediated through tar buildup
(T  ) in the lungs.
Figure 4.20 A causal DAG representing smoking’s effect on cancer. The
variable for genetics (D) is gray because it is unobserved in the data, so
we can’t run tests for conditional independencies involving D. However,
we can test other types of constraints.
If we have data observing all these variables, we can run
conditional independence tests targeting the following d-
separations: (C ⊥G T | S), (C ⊥G L | D, T), (C ⊥G L | D, S), (C
⊥G D), (S ⊥G L | D, T), and (T ⊥G D | S). But suppose we don’t
have data on the genetics variable (D ). For example,
perhaps measuring this genetics feature requires an
infeasibly expensive and invasive laboratory test. Of all the
d-separations we listed, the only one not involving D is (C ⊥G
T | S). We are down from six to one feasible conditional
independence test with which to test our DAG.
In general, a proposed causal model can have various
implications for the joint probability distributions that are
testable with data. The conditional independence implied by
the graph structure is one type of testable implication. But
some of the model’s implications are testable in cases of

latent variables. In this section, we’re going to look at how
we can test a DAG with one of these latent variable–related
constraints.
4.5.1 An example of a testable implication that
works with latent variables
The causal Markov assumption says d-separations imply
conditional independence in the data. So far, we’ve explored
direct conditional independence between variables, but
when some variables are latent, the graph can imply
conditional independence between functions of observed
variables. These implications are called “Verma constraints”
in the literature, though I will use the less jargony “functional
constraints.”
To illustrate, the DAG in figure 4.20 with latent variable D has
the following functional constraint (for now, don’t worry
about how its derived):
Just as the d-separation (C ⊥G T | S ) implies that the
conditional independence statement (C ⊥ T | S ) should hold
for the observational joint distribution, the functional
constraint (C ⊥G h(L, C, T )) implies that C is independent of
some function h(.) of variables L, C, and T in the
observational joint distribution. Both implications are
testable since they don’t involve D. We now have two tests
we can run instead of one.
h(.) has two components:

P (l  |c, s, t) is a function that returns the probability that L
= l (suppose l is “true” for “has lung cancer” and “false”
for “no lung cancer”), given C = c, S = s, and T = t.
P (s |c) is a function that returns the probability that S = s
(suppose s is “low,” “medium,” or “high” depending on
how heavily a smoker smokes) given the cost of
cigarettes C = c.
h(.) then sums over all values of S. The function’s output is a
random variable that, according to the DAG, should be
independent of C. h(l, c, t ) is a function of P(l  |c, s, t ) and P 
(s |c), and it may feel odd thinking about independence in
terms of probability functions. Remember that the
independence relation is itself just a function of joint
probability distributions.
Next, we’ll fit models of P (l  |c, s, t) and P (s |c) from data and
test this independence relation. But first, we’ll look at
libraries that let us enumerate functional constraints like (C
⊥G h(L, C, T  )) from a DAG just like we could enumerate d-
separations with pgmpy’s get_independencies.
4.5.2 Libraries and perspectives on testing
functional constraints
How do we derive functional constraints like C ⊥G h(L, C, T  )?
Like d-separation, we can derive this type of constraint
algorithmically from the graph. One implementation is in the
verma.constraints function in the causaleffect R library. This
function takes in the DAG with nodes labeled as latent and
returns a set of testable constraints just like pgmpy’s
get_independencies. For Python, the library Y0 (pronounced
“why-not”) has a r_get_verma_constraints function (as of
version 0.2.10), which is a wrapper that calls causaleffect’s R
code. I’ll omit the Python code here because it requires

installing R, but visit www.altdeep.ai/causalAIbook for links to
libraries and references.

MATHEMATICAL INTUITION FOR FUNCTIONAL CONSTRAINTS, AND
SOME ADVICE
Our goal for this section is only to show that there are
ways to test your causal model even when there are latent
variables. Functional constraints are one way to do this,
but we don’t want to over-index on this particular flavor of
testable implication. It is more important to avoid the
dangerous mindset of limiting ourselves only to DAGs that
are fully observed in the data.
That said, for the curious, I’ll offer a very high-level
intuition for the math. Recall that the local Markov property
says that a node is conditionally independent of its non-
descendants, given its parents. From there, we derive
graphical criteria called d-separation that lets us find sets
of nodes where this applies, we write a graph algorithm
that uses those criteria to enumerate d-separations, and
we use that algorithm to enumerate some conditional
independence tests we can run.
For a given node X, let’s say “orphaned cousins” means
non-descendants of X that share a latent ancestor of X.
Here is, in informal terms, a latent variable analog to the
local Markov property: A node is conditionally independent
of its non-descendants given its nearest observed
ancestors, its orphaned cousins, and other nearest
observed ancestors of those cousins. Just as with d-
separations, we can derive graphical criteria to identify
individual cases where this applies.
Recall that we can factorize the joint probability
distribution such that each factor is the conditional
probability of a node’s outcome, given its parents. The
probability functions in the functional constraint (like the
P(l|c, s, t) and P(s|c) terms in h(l,c,t)) come into the picture

once we start marginalizing that factorization over the
latent variables and doing subsequent probability math.
See the references listed at
https://www.altdeep.ai/p/causalaibook if you want to deep
dive. But my warning from the previous section holds here
—our goal is to falsify our DAG and move on to our target
causal inference. Beware of falling down statistical,
mathematical, and theoretical rabbit holes on the way to
that goal.
Now that we have a new testable implication in the form of C
⊥G h(L, C, T  ), let’s test it out.
4.5.3 Testing a functional constraint
To test (C ⊥G h(L, C, T  )), we have to calculate h(l, c, t ) =
∑SP (l |c, s, t)P (s |c ) for each item in our data. That requires
us to model P (l  | c, s, t ) and P (s |c ). There are several
modeling approaches we could go with, but we’ll use a naive
Bayes classifier for this example so we can stick with using
the pgmpy and pandas libraries. We’ll take the following
steps:
1. Discretize cost (C  ) so we can treat it as a discrete
variable.
2. Use pgmpy to fit a naive Bayes classifier to P (l | c, s, t)
and P (s |c ).
3. Write a function that takes in values of L, C, T and
calculates h(L, C, T  ).
4. Apply that function to each row in the data to get a new
column of h(L, C, T  ) values.
5. Run an independence test between that column and the
C column.

SETTING UP YOUR ENVIRONMENT
The following code uses pgmpy version 0.1.19 because
versions up to 0.1.24 (current at the time of writing) have
a bug (already reported) that can cause issues with some
of the naive Bayes classifier inference code. You don’t need
to do this if you use another method of calculating P(l|c, s,
t) and P(s|c). For stability, we’ll also use pandas version
1.4.3, which was the version when pgmpy 0.1.19 was
current. Note that if you have installed later versions of
pgmpy and pandas, you might have to uninstall those
versions before installing these, or you could just spin up a
new Python environment. Visit
https://www.altdeep.ai/p/causalaibook for links to the
Jupyter notebooks with the code and notes on setting up a
working environment.
First, we’ll import the data. We’ll also discretize the cost of
cigarettes (C) so it is more amenable to modeling with
pgmpy.

Listing 4.10 Importing and formatting cigarette and cancer data
from functools import partial
import numpy as np
import pandas as pd
data_url = "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/altdeep/causalML/master
[CA] /datasets/cigs_and_cancer.csv"
data = pd.read_csv(data_url)     #1
cost_lower = np.quantile(data["C"], 1/3)    #2
cost_upper = np.quantile(data["C"], 2/3)  #2
def discretize_three(val, lower, upper):  #2
    if val < lower:   #2
        return "Low"    #2
    if val < upper:    #2
        return "Med"   #2
    return "High"    #2
    #2
data_disc = data.assign(    #2
    C = lambda df: df['C'].map(    #2
            partial(   #2
                discretize_three,   #2
                lower=cost_lower,   #2
                upper=cost_upper    #2
            )   #2
        )    #2
)    #2
data_disc = data_disc.assign(     #3
    L = lambda df: df['L'].map(str),    #3
)    #3
print(data_disc)
#1 Load the CSV file into a pandas ΔataFrame.
#2 Δiscretize cost (C) into a discrete variable with three levels to
facilitate conditional impendence tests.
#3 Δiscretize cost (C) into a discrete variable with three levels to
facilitate conditional impendence tests.
#4 Turn lung cancer (L) from a Boolean to a string, so the conditional
independence test will treat it as a discrete variable.
The print(data_disc) line prints out the elements of the
data_disc DataFrame.
       C     S     T      L
0   High   Med   Low   True
1    Med  High  High  False
2    Med  High  High   True
3    Med  High  High   True
4    Med  High  High   True
.. ... ... ...  ...
95   Low  High  High   True
96  High  High  High  False
97   Low   Low   Low  False
98  High   Low   Low  False
99   Low  High  High   True
[100 rows x 4 columns]

Now we need to model P (l | c, s, t ) and P (s |c ). We’ll opt for
a naive Bayes classifier, a probabilistic model that “naively”
assumes that, in the case of P(l | c, s, t), cost (C ), smoking
(S ), and tar (T  ) are conditionally independent given lung
cancer status (L ). According to our causal DAG, that is
clearly not true, but that doesn’t matter if all we want is a
good way to calculate probability values for L given C, S, and
T. A naive Bayes classifier will do that well enough.
Listing 4.11 Fit naive Bayes classifier of P(l| c, s, t)
from pgmpy.inference import VariableElimination
from pgmpy.models import NaiveBayes
model_L_given_CST = NaiveBayes()    #1
model_L_given_CST.fit(data_disc, 'L')   #1
infer_L_given_CST = VariableElimination(model_L_given_CST)   #1
#1
def p_L_given_CST(L_val, C_val, S_val, T_val):#1
    result_out = infer_L_given_CST.query(   #1
        variables=["L"],    #1
        evidence={'C': C_val, 'S': S_val, 'T': T_val},    #1
        show_progress=False    #1
    )    #1
    var_outcomes = result_out.state_names["L"]    #1
    var_values = result_out.values    #1
    prob = dict(zip(var_outcomes, var_values))    #1
    return prob[L_val]  #1
#1 We’ll use a naive Bayes classifier in pgmpy to calculate the
probability value for a given value of L given values of C, S, and T. In
this case, we’ll use variable elimination.
#2 We’ll use a naive Bayes classifier in pgmpy to calculate the
probability value for a given value of L given values of C, S, and T. In
this case, we’ll use variable elimination.
Now we’ll do the same for P (s |c ).

Listing 4.12 Fit naive Bayes classifier of P(s|c)
model_S_given_C = NaiveBayes()    
model_S_given_C.fit(data_disc, 'S')    
infer_S_given_C = VariableElimination(model_S_given_C)    
def p_S_given_C(S_val, C_val):    
    result_out = infer_S_given_C.query(    
        variables=['S'],    
        evidence={'C': C_val},    
        show_progress=False    
    )    
    var_names = result_out.state_names["S"]    
    var_values = result_out.values    
    prob = dict(zip(var_names, var_values))    
    return prob[S_val]
Now we’ll bring these together to implement the h(L, T, C )
function. The following code uses a for loop to do the
summation over S.
Listing 4.13 Combine models to create h(L, T, C)
def h_function(L, C, T):    #1
    summ = 0     #2
    for s in ["Low", "Med", "High"]:   #2
        summ += p_L_given_CST(L, C, s, T) * p_S_given_C(s, C)    #2
    return summ
#1 Implement h(L, C, T).
#2 Implement the summation of P(l|c,s,t) * P(s|c) over s.
Now, we’ll calculate the full set of outcomes for set {C, T,
L }. Given these outcomes, we can calculate the h(L, C, T  )
for each of these combinations using the preceding function.
Listing 4.14 Calculate the outcome combinations of C, T, and L
ctl_outcomes = pd.DataFrame(
    [     #1
        (C, T, L)     #1
        for C in ["Low", "Med", "High"]    #1
        for T in ["Low", "High"]    #1
        for L in ["False", "True"]     #1
    ],    #1
    columns = ['C', 'T', 'L']     #1
)
#1 Calculate these values for each possible combination of outcomes of
L, C, and T. First, we use list comprehensions to make a ΔataFrame
containing all the combinations.

Printing this shows all combinations of outcomes for C, T,
and L.
       C     T      L
0    Low   Low  False
1    Low   Low   True
2    Low  High  False
3    Low  High   True
4    Med   Low  False
5    Med   Low   True
6    Med  High  False
7    Med  High   True
8   High   Low  False
9   High   Low   True
10  High  High  False
11  High  High   True
For each of these outcomes, we’ll apply h(L, C, T).
Listing 4.15 Calculate h(L, C, T) for each outcome of C, T, L
h_dist = ctl_outcomes.assign(    
    h_func = ctl_outcomes.apply(    
        lambda row: h_function(    
            row['L'], row['C'], row['T']), axis = 1    
    )    
)    
print(h_dist)
Now for each joint outcome of C, T, and L, we have a value of
h(L, C, T).
       C     T      L    h_func
0    Low   Low  False  0.392395
1    Low   Low   True  0.607605
2    Low  High  False  0.255435
3    Low  High   True  0.744565
4    Med   Low  False  0.522868
5    Med   Low   True  0.477132
6    Med  High  False  0.369767
7    Med  High   True  0.630233
8   High   Low  False  0.495525
9   High   Low   True  0.504475
10  High  High  False  0.344616
11  High  High   True  0.655384
Finally, we’ll merge this h_func distribution into the dataset
such that for each row of our data, we get a value of h(L, C,
T ).

Listing 4.16 Merge to get a value of h(L, C, T) for each row in the data
df_mod = data_disc.merge(h_dist, on=['C', 'T', 'L'], how='left')    #1
print(df_mod)
#1 Add a column representing the variable h(L, C, T).
We see the result with print(df_mod):
       C     S     T      L    h_func
0   High   Med   Low   True  0.504475
1    Med  High  High  False  0.369767
2    Med  High  High   True  0.630233
3    Med  High  High   True  0.630233
4    Med  High  High   True  0.630233
..   ...   ...   ...    ...       ...
95   Low  High  High   True  0.744565
96  High  High  High  False  0.344616
97   Low   Low   Low  False  0.392395
98  High   Low   Low  False  0.495525
99   Low  High  High   True  0.744565
[100 rows x 5 columns]
The functional constraint says that C and h(L, C, T  ) should
be independent, so we can look at the evidence of
independence between the h_func column and the C column.
Since we discretized C, our calculated outcomes for h(L, C,
T  ) are technically discrete, so we could use a chi-squared
test. But h(L, C, T  ) is continuous in theory, so instead we’ll
use a box plot to visualize dependence between the two
variables. The functional constraint says C and h(L, C, T  )
should be independent, so we’ll use a box plot that plots
values of h(L, C, T  ) against values of C to visually inspect
whether C and h(L, C, T  ) look independent.
Listing 4.17 Box plot visualizing independence between C and h(L, C, T)
df_mod.boxplot("h_func", "C")
This produces figure 4.21.


Figure 4.21 A box plot visualization of cost (C) on the x-axis and the
function h(L, C, T) on the y-axis (labeled “Sum product”). The overlap of
the distributions of the sum product for each value of C supports the
functional constraints assertion that these two quantities are
independent.
The x-axis in figure 4.21 is different levels of cost (low,
medium, and high). The y-axis represents values of the sum.
Figure 4.21 is a box wand whiskers plot; each box is a
representation of the distribution of the sum product for a
given value of C. The top and bottom of the boxes are the
quartiles of the distribution, the lines in the middle of the
boxes are the median, and the shorter horizonal lines are the
max and min values (for low cost, the median, upper
quartile, and max are quite close). In summary, it looks as
though the distributions of the sum product don’t change
much across the different levels of cost; that’s what
independence is supposed to look like.
We can also derive a p-value using an analysis of variance
(ANOVA) approach, this time using an F-test rather than a
chi-squared test. The following code uses the statsmodels
library to run an ANOVA test.
Note  “PR( >F)” means the probability of seeing an F-
statistic for a given variable (in our case, C) is at least as
large as the F-statistic calculated from the data,
assuming that the variable is independent of sum_product
(i.e., the p-value).

Listing 4.18 Using ANOVA to evaluate independence
from statsmodels.formula.api import ols
import statsmodels.api as sm
model = ols('h_func ~ C', data=df_mod).fit()    #1
aov_table = sm.stats.anova_lm(model, typ=2)   #1
print(aov_table["PR(>F)"]["C"])   #1
model = ols('h_func ~ T', data=df_mod).fit()    #2
aov_table = sm.stats.anova_lm(model, typ=2)    #2
print(aov_table["PR(>F)"]["T"])    #2
model = ols('h_func ~ L', data=df_mod).fit()     #3
aov_table = sm.stats.anova_lm(model, typ=2)  #3
print(aov_table["PR(>F)"]["L"])   #3
#1 A recipe for doing ANOVA using the statmodels library
#2 Returns a high p-value, which supports (fails to falsify) the assertion
that h(L, C, T) and C are independent
#3 Just as a sanity check, we run the same test to see whether h(L, C, T)
looks independent of T and L. Unlike C, T and L should not be
independent of h(L, C, T) and as expected, these tests return much
smaller p-values, indicating dependence.
We print the p-value for C with print(aov_table["PR(>F)"]["C"])
and get ~0.1876. That p-value indicates we can’t reject the
null hypothesis of independence, so it looks like the data
supports the constraint. We also run the same test for T and
L and, as expected, these are much smaller, indicating
evidence of dependence. They are lower, both falling below
the common .1 threshold where a standard hypothesis test
would reject the hypothesis that h(L, C, T) is independent of
T and L.
4.5.4 Final thoughts on testable implications
A DAG’s d-separation and functional constraints imply that
certain conditional independencies should hold in the joint
probability distribution if the DAG is a good causal model of
the DGP. We can falsify the DAG by running statistical tests
for conditional independence.
More generally, a causal model can have different
mathematical implications for the underlying joint probability

distribution, and some of these can be tested. For example,
if your model assumed the relationship between a cause and
effect was linear, you could look for evidence of nonlinearity
in the data (we’ll see more about functional causal
assumptions in chapter 6). And, of course, you can falsify
your model’s implications with experiments (as we’ll see in
chapter 7).
The better we get at causal modeling, the better we get at
testing and falsifying our causal models. But remember,
don’t let the statistical and mathematical nuances of testing
distract you from your goal of getting a good enough model
and moving on to your target causal inference.
4.6 Primer on (the perils of) causal
discovery
In the previous workflow, we proposed a causal DAG,
considered what implications (like conditional independence)
the DAG had for the observational joint distribution, and then
tested those implications with the data. What if we went in
the other direction? What if we analyzed the data for
statistical evidence of causality induced constraints, and
then constructed a causal DAG that is consistent with those
constraints?
This describes the task of causal discovery: statistical
learning of causal DAGs from data. In this section, I’ll provide
a brief primer on causal discovery and cover what you need
to know to make use of this class of algorithms.

BEWARE THE FALSE PROMISES OF CAUSAL DISCOVERY
Causal discovery algorithms are often presented as
magical tools that convert any dataset, no matter how
limited in quality, into a causal DAG. That false promise
discourages the mindset of modeling the DGP (rather than
the data) and falsifying candidate models. It is also why it
is hard to find consistent use cases for discovery in
practice. This section takes the approach of framing how
discovery algorithms work and where they fail, rather than
going through a list of algorithms. I’ll conclude with advice
about how to effectively incorporate these algorithms into
your analysis workflow.
We’ll start with an overview of key ideas that underpin
discovery algorithms.
4.6.1 Approaches to causal discovery
There are several approaches to causal discovery. Some
algorithms (often called constraint-based algorithms) do
what I just suggested—reverse engineer a graph from
evidence of conditional independence in the data. Other
algorithms (often called score-based algorithms) turn the
causal DAG into an explanatory model of the data and find
causal DAGs that have a high goodness-of-fit score. Yet
another approach is to assume additional constraints on the
functional relationships between parents and children in the
causal DAG, as we’ll see with structural causal models in
chapter 6.
The space of possible DAGs is a discrete space. One class of
approaches tries to soften this space into a continuous space
and use continuous optimization techniques. The popularity

of automatic differentiation libraries for deep learning have
accelerated this trend.
Because the space of DAGs can be quite large, it is useful to
incorporate prior knowledge to constrain the size of that
space. This often takes the form of specifying what edges
must be present or what must be absent, or of using
Bayesian priors on graph structure.
Some causal discovery algorithms can work with
experimental data. This requires telling the algorithm which
variables were set by the experimenter (or as we’ll say
starting in chapter 7, which were “intervened upon”).
To get started with causal discovery using Python, I
recommend the PyWhy libraries for causal discovery such as
causal-learn and DoDiscover.
4.6.2 Causal discovery, causal faithfulness, and
latent variable assumptions
The causal Markov property assumes that if our DAG is true,
d-separations in that DAG imply conditional independence
statements in the joint probability of the variables:
Causal faithfulness (or just “faithfulness”) is the converse
statement—conditional independence in the joint distribution
implies d-separation in the graph:
Many causal discovery algorithms rely on an assumption that
faithfulness holds. It may not.

DISCOVERY AND FAITHFULNESS VIOLATIONS
In section 4.4, we used the Markov property to test a
candidate DAG; given a d- separation statement that held for
the DAG, we ran a statistical test to check for empirical
evidence of the conditional independence implied by that d-
separation.
Imagine you wanted to build your graph by going in reverse.
You detect evidence of an instance of conditional
independence in your data, and then you limit your space of
candidate DAGs to those consistent with the implied d-
separation. You do this iteratively until you’ve narrowed
down the space of candidate DAGs. Some discovery
algorithms do some version of this procedure, and those that
do are relying on a faithfulness assumption.
Note  Algorithms that match evidence of conditional
independence to d-separation are often called
“constraint-based” discovery algorithms. A well-known
example is the PC algorithm. Constraint-based
algorithms find DAGs that are constrained to be
consistent with the empirical evidence of causality.
The trouble comes from “faithfulness violations”—special
cases where conditional independence in a joint probability
distribution does not map to d-separation statements in a
ground truth DAG. A simple example of a faithfulness
violation is the case of a three-variable system that can
decompose as follows: P (x, y, z ) = P (x, y )P (y, z )P (x, z ).
That is, for any value of one variable, the association
between the other two variables is always the same. You
could detect this peculiar form of independence in data, but
you can’t represent it with d-separation in a DAG. (If you
don’t believe me, try.)

Researchers worry about these special cases because they
mean a discovery algorithm that relies on faithfulness
doesn’t generalize to all distributions. When you use these
algorithms, you are assuming faithfulness holds for you
problem domain, and that’s not something you can test.
However, violations of causal faithfulness are not typically
the biggest source of headaches in practical causal
discovery. That honor is reserved for latent variables.
THE CHALLENGE OF LATENT VARIABLES
The bigger pain is that most causal discovery algorithms, yet
again, have a latent variable problem. To illustrate, suppose
the true causal DAG was the DAG in figure 4.22.
Figure 4.22 Assume this is the true causal DAG. Here, B, C, and D are
conditionally independent, given A.
In this DAG, variables B, C, and D are conditionally
independent of one another, given A. Now suppose that A
were not observed in the data. With A as a latent variable,
the discovery algorithm can’t run tests like B ⊥ C | A. The
algorithm will detect a dependence between B, C, and D but
will not find conditional independence between the three
given A, and it might possibly return a DAG like figure 4.23,
which reflects these results.

Figure 4.23 If A is latent, conditional independence tests that condition
on A can’t be run. The algorithm would detect dependence between B,
C, and D but no conditional independence given A, and it might possibly
return a graph such as this.
The remedy for this problem is to provide strong domain-
specific assumptions about the latent variable structure in
the discovery algorithm. A few generic discovery algorithms
provide some accommodation for latent variable
assumptions (the causal-learn library has a few). But this is
rare, because it is hard to make it easy for users to specify
domain-specific assumptions while still generalizing across
domains.
4.6.3 Equivalence classes and PDAGs
Let’s suppose our algorithm were to correctly recover all the
true conditional independence statements from data and
map them back to a true set of d-separation statements
(causal faithfulness holds). The problem we face now is that
multiple causal DAGs may have the same set of d-separation
statements. This set of candidate DAGs is called a Markov

equivalence class. The true causal DAG would be one of a
possibly large set of members of this class.
For example, suppose the DAG on the left of figure 4.24 were
the ground truth DAG. The DAG on the right of the graph
differs from the correct graph in the edge between A and T.
The two graphs have the same set of d-separation. In fact,
we can also change the directions of the edges between {L,
S } and {B, S } and still be in the same equivalence class,
except for introducing a collider {L → S ← B }, because a new
collider would change the set of d-separations.
Figure 4.24 Supposing the DAG on the left is the ground truth DAG, the
(wrong) DAG on the right is in the same Markov equivalence class. The
PDAG in the middle represents the equivalence class, where undirected
edges represent edges where members disagree on direction.

Some discovery algorithms will return a partially directed
acyclic graph (PDAG), such as the DAG in the center of figure
4.24. In the PDAG, undirected edges correspond to edges
where there is disagreement on the edge’s direction
between members of the Markov equivalence class. This is
nice, because we get a graphical representation of the
equivalence class, and the algorithm can potentially search
through the space of PDAGs instead of the larger space of
DAGs.

COLLIDERS AND DISCOVERY
Colliders feature prominently in causal discovery because
they allow us to orient edges in the DAG from evidence of
statistical dependence alone. Suppose we are using data
to attempt to construct the ground-truth DAG in figure
4.24. We find evidence of dependence in the data of an
edge between A and T. The idea of Markov equivalence
means that evidence is not enough to determine the
direction of that edge. Generally, evidence of dependence
and independence in the data can imply the presence of
edges but not their direction.
Colliders are the exception. It is possible to detect colliders
like {T → E ← L} from evidence of independence and
dependence alone; if the data suggests T and L are
independent, but become dependent when conditioning on
E, you have evidence of a collider with directed edges {T →
E ← L}.
Colliders can also force orientation of edges outside of the
collider. For example, consider the edge between E and X
in the ground-truth DAG in figure 4.23. We might infer the
existence of that edge from the following evidence in the
data:
E and X are dependent.
T and X are dependent.
T and X are independent, given E.
An edge between E and X is consistent with that evidence,
but should we go with E → X or E ← X? Here, the collider {T
→ E ← L} helps; it already oriented the edge T → E, so
adding E ← X would induce another collider {T → E ← X}.
That collider would suggest T and X are independent but
become dependent when conditioning on E, which violates

the second and third observed items of evidence. So we
conclude the edge is oriented as E → X by process of
elimination.
Some causal discovery algorithms essentially
algorithmicize this kind of logic. But remember, this logic
breaks down when latent variables induce dependence
between observed variables.
That said, PDAGs and Markov equivalence classes only
capture equivalence between DAGs encoding the same set
of conditional independence constraints. If you want to find
all graphs that satisfy an additional layer of constraining
assumptions, such as all graphs that have the same
posterior probability given a certain prior, then the PDAG
might not be sufficient.
If we go only on conditional independence, data can’t
distinguish between members of the Markov equivalence
class, because having the same set of d-separations means
having the same evidence of conditional independence in
the data. This is an example of a lack of causal identification
—when our data and a set of causal assumptions are not
sufficient to disambiguate between possible answers to a
causal question (in this case “what is the right causal
DAG?”). We’ll explore causal identification in depth in
chapter 10.
4.6.4 How to think about causal discovery
In section 4.3, I argued that testing for causality induced
constraints like conditional independence using off-the-shelf
hypothesis testing libraries should be viewed more as a
heuristic approach to refuting your causal DAG than a
rigorous statistical procedure for validating the DAG.

Similarly, I argued that for the practical user, off-the-shelf
causal discovery algorithms should be viewed as a tool for
exploratory data analysis during a human-driven causal DAG
building process. The more you can input various types of
domain knowledge and knowledge of latent variables into
these algorithms, the better. But even then, they will
produce obvious errors. Just as with the hypothesis testing
case, avoid rabbit holes of trying to “fix” the discovery
algorithm so it doesn’t make these errors. Use causal
discovery as one imperfect tool in your broader project of
building a good causal DAG and running the subsequent
causal inference analysis.
Summary
Causal modeling induces conditional independence
constraints on the joint probability distribution. D-
separation 
provides 
a 
graphical 
representation 
of
conditional independence constraints.
Building an intuition for d-separation is important for
reasoning about causal effect inference and other
queries.
The colliders might make d-separation confusing, but
you can build intuition by using d-separation functions in
NetworkX and pgmpy.
Using 
traditional 
conditional 
independence 
testing
libraries to test d-separation has its challenges. The tests
are sensitive to sample size, they don’t work well in
many machine learning settings, and their hypotheses
are misaligned.
Because of these challenges, it is best to view the
attempts to falsify the DAG using off-the-shelf conditional
independence testing libraries as more of a heuristic.
Focus on the overall goal of building a good (i.e., hard to
refute) causal DAG and moving on to your downstream

causal inference task. Avoid fixating on theoretical rigor
in statistical hypothesis testing.
When there are latent variables, a causal DAG may still
have testable implications for functions of the observed
variables.
Causal discovery refers to the use of statistical
algorithms to recover a causal DAG from data.
The causal faithfulness property assumes conditional
independence in the joint probability distribution maps to
a true set of d-separations that hold in the ground truth
causal DAG.
A Markov equivalence class of DAGs is a set of DAGs with
the same set of d-separations. Assuming you have the
true set of d-separations, the ground truth causal DAG
generally shares that set with other (wrong) DAGs.
Causal discovery is especially vulnerable to latent
variables.
The more you can constrain causal inference with prior
assumptions, such as latent structure and which edges
cannot possibly exist and which must exist, the better.
Causal discovery algorithms are useful exploratory data
analysis tools in the process of building a causal DAG,
but they are not reliable replacements for that process.
Again, focus on the overall goal of building a good causal
DAG and moving on to the downstream causal inference
analysis. 
Avoid 
trying 
to 
“fix” 
causal 
discovery
algorithms so they don’t produce obvious errors in your
domain.

5 Connecting causality and
deep learning
This chapter covers
Incorporating deep learning into a causal graphical
model
Training a causal graphical model with a variational
autoencoder
Using causal methods to enhance machine learning
The title of this book is Causal AI, but how exactly does
causality connect to AI? More specifically, how does causality
connect with deep learning, the dominant paradigm in AI? In
this chapter, I look at this question from two perspectives:
How to incorporate deep learning into a causal model —
We’ll look at a causal model of a computer vision
problem (section 5.1) and then train the deep causal
image model (section 5.2).
How to use causal reasoning to do better deep learning 
—We’ll look at a case study on independence of
mechanism and semi-supervised learning (section 5.3.1
and 5.3.2), and we’ll demystify deep learning with
causality (section 5.3.3).
The term deep learning broadly refers to applications of deep
neural networks. It’s a machine learning approach that
stacks many nonlinear models together in sequential layers,
emulating the connections of neurons in brains. “Deep”
refers to stacking many layers to achieve more modeling
power, particularly in terms of modeling high-dimensional

and nonlinear data, such as visual media and natural
language text. Neural nets have been around for a while, but
relatively recent advancements in hardware and automatic
differentiation have made it possible to scale deep neural
networks to extremely large sizes. That scaling is why, in
recent years, there have been multiple cases of deep
learning outperforming humans on many advanced inference
and decision-making tasks, such as image recognition,
natural language processing, game playing, medical
diagnosis, autonomous driving, and generating lifelike text,
images, and video.
But asking how deep learning connects to causality can elicit
frustrating answers. AI company CEOs and leaders in big
tech fuel hype about the power of deep learning models and
even claim they can learn the causal structure of the world.
On the other hand, some leading researchers claim these
models are merely “stochastic parrots” that can echo
patterns of correlation that, while nuanced and complex, still
fall short of true causal understanding.
Our goal in this chapter is to reconcile these perspectives.
But skipping ahead, the main takeaway is that deep learning
architecture can be integrated into a causal model and we
can train the model using deep learning training techniques.
But also, we can use causal reasoning to build better deep
learning models and improve how we train them.
We’ll anchor this idea in two case studies:
Building a causal DAG for computer vision using a
variational autoencoder
Implementing better semi-supervised learning using
independence of mechanism

Other examples of the interplay of causality and AI that
you’ll see in the rest of the book will build on the intuition we
get from these case studies. For example, chapter 9 will
illustrate counterfactual reasoning using a variational
autoencoder like the one we’ll build in this chapter. In
chapter 11, we’ll explore machine learning and probabilistic
deep learning approaches for causal effect inference.
Chapter 13 will show how to combine large language models
and causal reasoning.
We’ll start by considering how to incorporate deep learning
into a causal model.
5.1 A causal model of a computer
vision problem
Let’s look at a computer vision problem that we can
approach with a causal DAG. Recall the MNIST data from
chapter 1, composed of images of digits and their labels,
illustrated in figure 5.1.

Figure 5.1 MNIST data featuring images of handwritten digits and their
digit labels
There is a related dataset called Typeface MNIST (TMNIST)
that also features digit images and their digit labels.
However, instead of handwritten digits, the images are digits
rendered in 2,990 different fonts, illustrated in figure 5.2. For
each image, in addition to a digit label, there is a font label.
Examples of the font labels include “GrandHotel-Regular,”
“KulimPark-Regular,” and “Gorditas-Bold.”

Figure 5.2 Examples from the Typeface MNIST, which is composed of
typed digits with different typefaces. In addition to a digit label for each
digit, there is a label for one of 2,990 different typefaces (fonts).
In this analysis, we’ll combine these datasets into one and
build a simple deep causal generative model on that data.
We’ll simplify the “fonts” label into a sample binary label that
indicates “handwritten” for MNIST images and “typed” for
the TMNIST images.
We have seen how to build a causal generative model on top
of a DAG. We factorized the joint distribution into a product
of causal Markov kernels representing the conditional
probability distributions for each node, conditional on their
parents in the DAG. In our previous examples in pgmpy, we
fit a conditional probability table for each of these kernels.

You can imagine how hard it would be to use a conditional
probability table to represent the conditional probability
distribution of pixels in an image. But there is nothing
stopping us from modeling the causal Markov kernel with a
deep neural net, which we know is flexible enough to work
with high-dimensional features like pixels. In this section, I’ll
demonstrate how to use deep neural nets to model the
causal Markov kernels defined by a causal DAG.
5.1.1 Leveraging the universal function
approximator
Deep learning is a highly effective universal function
approximator. Let’s imagine there is a function that maps
some set of inputs to some set of outputs, but we either
don’t know the function or it’s too hard to write down in
math or code. Given enough examples of those inputs and
outputs, deep learning can approximate that function with
high precision. Even if that function is nonlinear and high-
dimensional, with enough data, deep learning will learn a
good approximation.
We regularly work with functions in causal modeling and
inference, and sometimes it makes sense to approximate
them, so long as the approximations preserve the causal
information we care about. For example, the causal Markov
property makes us interested in functions that map values of
a node’s parents in the causal DAG to values (or probability
values) of that node.
In this section, we’ll do this mapping between a node and its
parents with the variational autoencoder (VAE) framework.
We’ll train two deep neural nets in the VAE, one of which
maps parent cause variables to a distribution of the outcome
variable, and another that maps the outcome variable to a
distribution of the cause variables. This example will

showcase the use of deep learning when causality is
nonlinear and high-dimensional; the effect variable will be an
image represented as a high-dimensional array, and the
cause variables will represent the contents of the image.
5.1.2 Causal abstraction and plate models
But what does it mean to build a causal model of an image?
Images are comprised of pixels arranged in a grid. As data,
we can represent that pixel grid as a matrix of numerical
values corresponding to color. In the case of both MNIST and
TMNIST, the image is a 28 × 28 matrix of grayscale values,
as illustrated in figure 5.3.
Figure 5.3 An MNIST image of “6” (left) and a TMNIST image of “7”. In
their raw form, these are 28 × 28 matrices of numeric values
corresponding to grayscale values.
A typical machine learning model looks at this 28 × 28
matrix of pixels as 28 × 28 = 784 features. The machine
learning algorithm learns statistical patterns connecting the
pixels to one another and their labels. Based on this fact, one
might be tempted to treat each individual pixel as a node in

the naive causal DAG, as in figure 5.4, where for visual
simplicity I’ve drawn 16 pixels (an arbitrary number) instead
of all 784.
Figure 5.4 What a naive causal DAG might look like for an image
represented by a 4 × 4 matrix
In figure 5.4, there are edges from the digit and is-
handwritten variables to each pixel. Further, there are
examples of edges representing possible causal relationships
between pixels. Causal edges between pixels imply the color
of one pixel is a cause of another. Perhaps most of these
relationships are between nodes that are close, with a few
far-reaching edges. But how would we know if one pixel
causes another? If two pixels are connected, how would we
know the direction of causality?
WORKING AT THE RIGHT LEVEL OF ABSTRACTION
With these connections among only 16 pixels, the naive DAG
in figure 5.4 is already quite unwieldy. It would be much

worse with 784 pixels. Aside from the unwieldiness of a DAG,
the problem with a pixel-level model is that our causal
questions are generally not at the pixel level—we’d probably
never ask “what is the causal effect of this pixel on that
pixel?” In other words, the pixel is too low a level of
abstraction, which is why thinking about causal relationships
between individual pixels feels a bit absurd.
In applied statistics domains, such as econometrics, social
science, public health, and business, our data has variables
like per capita income, revenue, location, age, etc. These
variables are typically already at the level of abstraction we
want to think about when we get the data. But modern
machine learning focuses on many perception problems from
raw media, such as images, video, text, and sensor data. We
don’t generally want to do causal reasoning at the low level
of these features. Our causal questions are usually about the
high-level abstractions behind these low-level features. We
need to model at these higher abstraction levels.
Instead of thinking about individual pixels, we’ll think about
the entire image. We’ll define a variable X to represent how
the image appears; i.e., X is a matrix random variable
representing pixels. Figure 5.5 illustrates a causal DAG for
the TMNIST case. Simply put, the identity of the digits (0–9)
and the font (2,990 possible values) are the causes, and the
image is the effect.

Figure 5.5 A simple causal DAG that represents the implied DGP behind
Typeface MNIST
In this case, we are using the causal DAG to make an
assertion that the label causes the image. That is not always
the case, as we’ll discuss in our case study on semi-
supervised learning in section 5.3. As with all causal models,
it depends on the data generating process (DGP) within a
domain.

WHY SAY THAT THE DIGIT CAUSES THE IMAGE?
Plato’s allegory of the cave describes a group of people
who have lived in a cave all their lives, without seeing the
world. They face a blank cave wall and watch shadows
projected on the wall from objects passing in front of a fire
behind them. The shadows are simplified and sometimes
distorted representations of the true objects passing in
front of the fire. In this case, we can think of the form of
the objects as being the cause of the shadow.
Analogously, the true form of the digit label causes the
representation in the image. The MNIST images were
written by people, and they have some Platonic ideal of
the digit in their head that they want to render onto paper.
In the process, that ideal is distorted by motor variation in
the hand, the angle of the paper, the friction of the pen on
the paper, and other factors—the rendered image is a
“shadow” caused by that “ideal.”
This idea is related to a concept called “vision as inverse
graphics” in computer vision (see
https://www.altdeep.ai/p/causalaibook for sources with
more information). In causal terms, the takeaway is that
when we are analyzing images rendered from raw signals
from the environment, and the task is to infer the actual
objects or events that resulted in those signals, causality
flows from those objects or events to the signals. The
inference task is to use the observed signals (shadows on
the cave wall) to infer the nature of the causes (objects in
front of the fire).
That said, images can be causes too. For example, if you
were modeling how people behave after seeing an image
in a mobile app (e.g., whether they “click”, “like”, or

“swipe left”), you could model the image as a cause of the
behavior.
PLATE MODELING
Modeling 2,990 fonts in our TMNIST data is overkill for our
purposes here. Instead, I combined these datasets into one—
half from MNIST and half from Typeface MNIST. Along with
the “digit” label, I’m just going to have a simple binary label
called “is-handwritten”, which is 1 (true) for images of
handwritten digits from MNIST and 0 (false) for images of
“typed” digits from TMNIST. We can modify our causal DAG
to get figure 5.6.
Figure 5.6 A causal DAG representing the combined MNIST and TMNIST
data, where “is-handwritten” is 1 (MNIST images) or 0 (TMNIST images)
Plate modeling is a visualizing technique used in probabilistic
machine learning that provides an excellent way to visualize
the higher-level abstractions while preserving the lower-level
dimensional detail. Plate notation is a method of visually
representing variables that repeat in a DAG (e.g., X1 to X16 in
figure 5.4)—in our case, we have repetition of the pixels.
Instead of drawing each of the 784 pixels as an individual
node, we use a rectangle or “plate” to group repeating
variables into subgraphs. We then write a number on the
plate to represent the number of repetitions of the entities
on the plate. Plates can nest within one another to indicate
repeated entities nested within repeated entities. Each plate

gets a letter subscript indexing the elements on that plate.
The causal DAG in figure 5.7 represents one image.
Figure 5.7 A plate model representation of the causal DAG. Plates
represent repeating variables, in this case 28 × 28 = 784 pixels. Xj is
the jth pixel.
During training, we’ll have a large set of training images.
Next, we’ll modify the DAG to capture all the images in the
training data.
5.2 Training a neural causal model
To train our neural causal model, we need to load and
prepare the training data, create the architecture of our
model, write a training procedure, and implement some tools
for evaluating how well training is progressing. We’ll start by
loading and preparing the data.
5.2.1 Setting up the training data
Our training data has N example images, so we need our
plate model to represent all N images in the training data,
half handwritten and half typed. We’ll add another plate
corresponding to repeating N sets of images and labels, as in
figure 5.8.

Figure 5.8 The causal model with an additional plate for the N images in
the data
Now we have a causal DAG that illustrates both our desired
level of causal abstraction as well as the dimensional
information we need to start training the neural nets in the
model.
Let’s first load Pyro and some other libraries and set some
hyperparameters.
SETTING UP YOUR ENVIRONMENT
This code was written using Python version 3.10.12 and
tested in Google Colab. The versions of the main libraries
include Pyro (pyro-ppl) version 1.8.4, torch version 2.2.1,
torchvision version 0.18.0+cu121, and pandas version
2.0.3. We’ll also use matplotlib for plotting.
Visit https://www.altdeep.ai/p/causalaibook for links to a
notebook that will load in Google Colab.

If GPUs are available on your device, it will be faster to train
the neural nets with CUDA (a platform for parallel computing
on GPUs). We’ll run a bit of code that lets us toggle it on. If
you don’t have GPUs or aren’t sure if you do, leave USE_CUDA
set to False.
Listing 5.1 Setting up for GPU training
import torch   
USE_CUDA = False   #1
DEVICE_TYPE = torch.device("cuda" if USE_CUDA else "cpu")
#1 Use CUDA if it is available.
First, we’ll make a subclass of the Dataset class (a class for
loading and preprocessing data) that will let us combine the
MNIST and TMNIST datasets.
Listing 5.2 Combining the data
from torch.utils.data import Dataset
import numpy as np
import pandas as pd
from torchvision import transforms
class CombinedDataset(Dataset):    #1
    def __init__(self, csv_file):
        self.dataset = pd.read_csv(csv_file)
    def __len__(self):
        return len(self.dataset)
    def __getitem__(self, idx):
        images = self.dataset.iloc[idx, 3:]     #2
        images = np.array(images, dtype='float32')/255.   #2
        images = images.reshape(28, 28)    #2
        transform = transforms.ToTensor()     #2
        images = transform(images)     #2
        digits = self.dataset.iloc[idx, 2]     #3
        digits = np.array([digits], dtype='int')     #3
        is_handwritten = self.dataset.iloc[idx, 1]     #4
        is_handwritten = np.array([is_handwritten], dtype='float32')    #4
        return images, digits, is_handwritten    #5
#1 This class loads and processes a dataset that combines MNIST and
Typeface MNIST. The output is a torch.utils.data.Dataset object.
#2 Load, normalize, and reshape the images to 28 × 28 pixels.
#3 Get and process the digit labels, 0–9.
#4 1 for handwritten digits (MNIST), and 0 for “typed” digits (TMNIST)
#5 Return a tuple of the image, the digit label, and the is_handwritten
label.

Next, we’ll use the DataLoader class (which allows for efficient
data iteration and batching during training) to load the data
from a CSV file in GitHub and split it into training and test
sets.
Listing 5.3 Downloading, splitting, and loading the data
from torch.utils.data import DataLoader
from torch.utils.data import random_split
def setup_dataloaders(batch_size=64, use_cuda=USE_CUDA):     #1
    combined_dataset = CombinedDataset(
"https://raw.githubusercontent.com/altdeep/causalML/master/datasets
↪/combined_mnist_tmnist_data.csv"
    )
    n = len(combined_dataset)     #2
    train_size = int(0.8 * n)    #2
    test_size = n - train_size    #2
    train_dataset, test_dataset = random_split(     #2
        combined_dataset,   #2
        [train_size, test_size],    #2
        generator=torch.Generator().manual_seed(42)   #2
    )     #2
    kwargs = {'num_workers': 1, 'pin_memory': use_cuda} #2
    train_loader = DataLoader(     #3
        train_dataset,     #3
        batch_size=batch_size,     #3
        shuffle=True,     #3
        **kwargs    #3
    )     #3
    test_loader = DataLoader(   #3
        test_dataset,    #3
        batch_size=batch_size,    #3
        shuffle=True,     #3
        **kwargs   #3
    )     #3
    return train_loader, test_loader
#1 Set up the data loader that loads the data and splits it into training
and test sets.
#2 Allot 80% of the data to training data and the remaining 20% to test
data.
#3 Create training and test loaders.
Next, we’ll set up the full variational autoencoder.
5.2.2 Setting up the variational autoencoder
The variational autoencoder (VAE) is perhaps the simplest
deep probabilistic machine learning modeling approach. In
the typical setup for applying VAE to images, we introduce a

latent continuous variable Z that has a smaller dimension
than the image data. Here, dimensionality refers to the
number of elements in a vector representation of the data.
For instance, our image is a 28 × 28 matrix of pixels, or
alternatively a vector with dimension 28 × 28 = 784. By
having a much smaller dimension than the image dimension,
the latent variable Z represents a compressed encoding of
the image information. For each image in the dataset, there
is a corresponding latent Z value that represents an
encoding of that image. This setup is illustrated in figure 5.9.
Figure 5.9 The causal DAG plate model, extended to include an
“encoding” variable Z. During training, the variable is latent, indicated
by the dashed line. (After the model is deployed, digit and is-
handwritten are also latent).
Z appears as a new parent in the causal DAG, but it’s
important to note that the classical VAE framework does not
define Z as causal. Now that we are thinking causally, we’ll
give Z a causal interpretation. Specifically, as parents of the
image node in the DAG, we view digit and is-handwritten as
causal drivers of what we see in the image. Yet there are
other elements of the image (e.g., the stroke thickness of a
handwritten character, or the font of a typed character) that

are also causes of what we see in the image. We’ll think of Z
as a continuous latent stand-in for all of these other causes
of the image that we are not explicitly modeling, like digit
and is-handwritten. Examples of these causes include the
nuance of the various fonts in the TMNIST labels and all of
the variations in the handwritten digits due to different
writers and motor movements as they wrote. With that in
mind, we can view P(X| digit, is-handwritten, Z) as the causal
Markov kernel of X. That said, it is important to remember
that the representation we learn for Z is a stand-in for latent
causes and is not the same as learning the actual latent
causes.
The VAE setup will train two deep neural networks: One
called an “encoder”, which encodes an image into a value
for Z. The other neural network, called the “decoder,” will
align with our DAG. The decoder generates an image from
the digit label, the is-handwritten label, and a Z value, as in
figure 5.10.
The decoder acts like a rendering engine; given a Z encoding
value and the values for digit and is-handwritten, it renders
an image.

Figure 5.10 The decoder neural network generates as output an image X
from inputs Z and the labels is-handwritten and digit. As with any
neural net, the inputs are processed through one or more “hidden
layers.”
KEY VAE CONCEPTS SO FAR
Variational autoencoder (VAE)—A popular framework in
deep generative modeling. We’re using it to model a
causal Markov kernel in a causal model.
Decoder—We use the decoder as the model of the causal
Markov kernel. It maps the observed causes is-handwritten
and digit, and the latent variable Z, to our image outcome
variable X.

This VAE approach allows us to use a neural net, a la the
decoder, to capture the complex and nonlinear relations
needed to model the image as an effect caused by digit and
is-handwritten. Modeling images would be difficult with the
conditional probability tables and other simple
parameterizations of causal Markov kernels we’ve discussed
previously.
First, let’s implement the decoder. We’ll pass in arguments
z_dim for the dimension of Z and hidden_dim for the dimension
(width) of the hidden layers. We’ll specify these variables
when we instantiate the full VAE. The decoder combines the
latent vector Z with additional inputs—the variable
representing the digit, and is-handwritten (a binary indicator
of whether the digit is handwritten). It will produce a 784-
dimensional output vector representing an image of size 28
× 28 pixels. This output vector contains the parameters for a
Bernoulli distribution for each pixel, essentially modeling the
likelihood of each pixel being “on.” The class uses two fully
connected layers (fc1 and fc2), and employs Softplus and
Sigmoid “activation functions,” which are the hallmarks of
how neural nets emulate neurons.

Listing 5.4 Implement the decoder
from torch import nn
class Decoder(nn.Module):    #1
    def __init__(self, z_dim, hidden_dim):
        super().__init__()
        img_dim = 28 * 28     #2
        digit_dim = 10    #3
        is_handwritten_dim = 1    #4
        self.softplus = nn.Softplus()     #5
        self.sigmoid = nn.Sigmoid()    #5
        encoding_dim = z_dim + digit_dim + is_handwritten_dim     #6
        self.fc1 = nn.Linear(encoding_dim, hidden_dim)   #6
        self.fc2 = nn.Linear(hidden_dim, img_dim)    #7
    def forward(self, z, digit, is_handwritten):     #8
        input = torch.cat([z, digit, is_handwritten], dim=1) #9
        hidden = self.softplus(self.fc1(input))    #10
        img_param = self.sigmoid(self.fc2(hidden))    #11
        return img_param
#1 A class for the decoder used in the VAE
#2 Image is 28 × 28 pixels.
#3 Digit is one-hot encoded digits 0–9, i.e., a vector of length 10.
#4 An indicator for whether the digit is handwritten that has size 1
#5 Softplus and sigmoid are nonlinear transforms (activation functions)
used in mapping between layers.
#6 fc1 is a linear function that maps the Z vector, the digit, and
is_handwritten to a linear output, which is passed through a softplus
activation function to create a hidden layer-a vector whose length is
given by hidden_layer.
#7 fc2 linearly maps the hidden layer to an output passed to a sigmoid
function. The resulting value is between 0 and 1.
#8 Define the forward computation from the latent Z variable value to a
generated X variable value.
#9 Combine Z and the labels.
#10 Compute the hidden layer.
#11 Pass the hidden layer to a linear transform and then to a sigmoid
transform to output a parameter vector of length 784. Each element of
the vector corresponds to a Bernoulli parameter value for an image
pixel.
We use the decoder in the causal model. Our causal DAG
acts as the scaffold for a causal probabilistic machine
learning model that, with the help of the decoder, defines a
joint probability distribution on {is-handwritten, digit, X, Z},
where Z is latent. We can use the model to calculate the
likelihood of the training data for a given value of Z.

The latent variable z, the digit identity represented as a one-
hot vector digit, and a binary indicator is_handwritten are
modeled as samples from standard distributions. These
variables are then fed into the decoder to produce
parameters (img_param) for a Bernoulli distribution
representing individual pixel probabilities of an image.
Note, using the Bernoulli distribution to model the pixels is a
bit of a hack. The pixels are not binary black and white
outcomes—they have grayscale values. The line
dist.enable_validation(False) lets us cheat by getting Bernoulli
log likelihoods for the images given a decoder’s img_param
output.
The following model code is a class method for a PyTorch
neural network module. We’ll see the entire class later.

Listing 5.5 The causal model
import pyro
import pyro.distributions as dist
dist.enable_validation(False)    #1
def model(self, data_size=1):     #2
    pyro.module("decoder", self.decoder)    #2
    options = dict(dtype=torch.float32, device=DEVICE_TYPE)
    z_loc = torch.zeros(data_size, self.z_dim, **options)    #3
    z_scale = torch.ones(data_size, self.z_dim, **options)   #3
    z = pyro.sample("Z", dist.Normal(z_loc, z_scale).to_event(1))    #3
    p_digit = torch.ones(data_size, 10, **options)/10     #4
    digit = pyro.sample(     #4
        "digit",    #4
        dist.OneHotCategorical(p_digit)     #4
    )    #4
    p_is_handwritten = torch.ones(data_size, 1, **options)/2     #5
    is_handwritten = pyro.sample(    #5
        "is_handwritten",     #5
        dist.Bernoulli(p_is_handwritten).to_event(1)     #5
    )     #5
    img_param = self.decoder(z, digit, is_handwritten)   #6
    img = pyro.sample("img", dist.Bernoulli(img_param).to_event(1))   #7
    return img, digit, is_handwritten
#1 Disabling distribution validation lets Pyro calculate log likelihoods
for pixels even though the pixels are not binary values.
#2 The model of a single image. Within the method, we register the
decoder, a PyTorch module, with Pyro. This lets Pyro know about the
parameters inside of the decoder network.
#3 We model the joint probability of Z, digit, and is_handwritten,
sampling each from canonical distributions. We sample Z from a
multivariate normal with location parameter z_loc (all zeros) and scale
parameter z_scale (all ones).
#4 We also sample the digit from a one-hot categorical distribution.
Equal probability is assigned to each digit.
#5 We similarly sample the is_handwritten variable from a Bernoulli
distribution.
#6 The decoder maps digit, is_handwritten, and Z to a probability
parameter vector.
#7 The parameter vector is passed to the Bernoulli distribution, which
models the pixel values in the data. The pixels are not technically
Bernoulli binary variables, but we’ll relax this assumption.
The preceding model method represents the DGP for one
image. The training_ model method in the following listing
applies that model method to the N images in the training
data.

Listing 5.6 Method for applying model to N images in data
def training_model(self, img, digit, is_handwritten, batch_size):     #1
    conditioned_on_data = pyro.condition(     #2
        self.model,
        data={
            "digit": digit,
            "is_handwritten": is_handwritten,
            "img": img
        }
    )
    with pyro.plate("data", batch_size):    #3
        img, digit, is_handwritten = conditioned_on_data(batch_size)
    return img, digit, is_handwritten
#1 The model represents the DGP for one image. The training_model
applies that model to the N images in the training data.
#2 Now we condition the model on the evidence in the training data.
#3 This context manager represents the N-size plate representing
repeating IID examples in the data in figure 5.9. In this case, N is the
batch size. It works like a for loop, iterating over each data unit in the
batch.
Our probabilistic machine learning model models the joint
distribution of {Z, X, digit, is-handwritten}. But since Z is
latent, the model will need to learn P(Z|X, digit, is-
handwritten). Given that we use the decoder neural net to go
from Z and the labels to X, the distribution of Z, given X and
the labels will be complex. We will use variational inference,
a technique where we first define an approximating
distribution Q(Z|X, digit, is-handwritten), and try to make
that distribution as close to P(Z|X, digit, is-handwritten) as
we can.
The main ingredient of the approximating distribution is the
second neural net in the VAE framework, the encoder,
illustrated in figure 5.11. The encoder maps an observed
image and its labels in the training data to a latent Z
variable.

Figure 5.11 The encoder maps actual images as input to the latent Z
variable as output.
The encoder does the work of compressing the information
in the image into a lower-dimensional encoding.

KEY VAE CONCEPTS SO FAR
Variational autoencoder (VAE)—A popular framework in
deep generative modeling. We’re using it to model a
causal Markov kernel in our causal model.
Decoder—We use the decoder as the model of the causal
Markov kernel. It maps observed causes is-handwritten and
digit, and the latent variable Z, to our image outcome
variable X.
Encoder—The encoder maps the image, digit, and is-
handwritten indicator to the parameters of a distribution
where we can draw samples of Z.
In the following code, the encoder takes as input an image, a
digit label, and the is-handwritten indicator. These inputs are
concatenated and passed through a series of fully connected
layers with Softplus activation functions. The final output of
the encoder consists of two vectors representing the location
(z_loc) and scale (z_scale) parameters of the latent space
distribution on Z, given observed values for image (img), digit
(digit), and is-handwritten (is_handwritten).

Listing 5.7 Implement the encoder
class Encoder(nn.Module):     #1
    def __init__(self, z_dim, hidden_dim):
        super().__init__()
        img_dim = 28 * 28     #2
        digit_dim = 10  #3
        is_handwritten_dim = 1
        self.softplus = nn.Softplus()    #4
        input_dim = img_dim + digit_dim + is_handwritten_dim     #5
        self.fc1 = nn.Linear(input_dim, hidden_dim)   #5
        self.fc21 = nn.Linear(hidden_dim, z_dim) #6
        self.fc22 = nn.Linear(hidden_dim, z_dim)    #6
    def forward(self, img, digit, is_handwritten):    #7
        input = torch.cat([img, digit, is_handwritten], dim=1)     #8
        hidden = self.softplus(self.fc1(input))    #9
        z_loc = self.fc21(hidden)     #10
        z_scale = torch.exp(self.fc22(hidden))  #10
        return z_loc, z_scale
#1 The encoder is an instance of a PyTorch module.
#2 The input image is 28 × 28 = 784 pixels.
#3 The digit dimension is 10.
#4 In the encoder, we’ll only use the softplus transform (activation
function).
#5 The linear transform fc1 combines with the softplus to map the 784-
dimensional pixel vector, 10-dimensional digit label vector, and 2-
dimensional is_handwritten vector to the hidden layer.
#6 The linear transforms, fc21 and fc22, will combine with the softplus
to map the hidden vector to Z’s vector space.
#7 Define the reverse computation from an observed X variable value to
a latent Z variable value.
#8 Combine the image vector, digit label, and is_handwritten label into
one input.
#9 Map the input to the hidden layer.
#10 The VAE framework will sample Z from a normal distribution that
approximates P(Z|img, digit, is_handwritten). The final transforms map
the hidden layer to a location and scale parameter for that normal
distribution.
The output of the encoder produces the parameters of a
distribution on Z. During training, given an image and its
labels (is-handwritten and digit), we want to get a good
value of Z, so we write a guide function that will use the
encoder to sample values of Z.

Listing 5.8 The guide function
def training_guide(self, img, digit, is_handwritten, batch_size):     #1
    pyro.module("encoder", self.encoder)    #2
    options = dict(dtype=torch.float32, device=DEVICE_TYPE)
    with pyro.plate("data", batch_size):     #3
        z_loc, z_scale = self.encoder(img, digit, is_handwritten)    #4
        normal_dist = dist.Normal(z_loc, z_scale).to_event(1)    #4
        z = pyro.sample("Z", normal_dist)     #5
#1 training_guide is a method of the VAE that will use the encoder.
#2 Register the encoder so Pyro is aware of its weight parameters.
#3 This is the same plate context manager for iterating over the batch
data that we see in the training_model.
#4 Use the encoder to map an image and its labels to parameters of a
normal distribution.
#5 Sample Z from that normal distribution
We combine these elements into one PyTorch neural network
module representing the VAE. We’ll initialize the latent
dimension of Z to be 50. We’ll set our hidden layer
dimension to 400 in both the encoder and decoder. That
means that given a dimension of 28 × 28 for the image, 1 for
the binary is-handwritten, and 10 for the one-hot-encoded
digit variable, we’ll take a 28 × 28 + 1 + 10 = 795-
dimensional feature vector and compress it down to a 400-
dimensional hidden layer, and then compress that down to a
50-dimensional location and scale parameter for Z’s
multivariate normal (Gaussian) distribution. The decoder
takes as input the values of digit, is-handwritten, and Z and
maps these to a 400-dimensional hidden layer and to the 28
× 28–dimensional image. These architectural choices of
latent variable dimension, number of layers, activation
functions, and hidden layer dimensions depend on the
problem and are typically selected by convention or by
experimenting with different values.
Now we’ll put these pieces together into the full VAE class.

Listing 5.9 Full VAE class
class VAE(nn.Module):
    def __init__(
        self,
        z_dim=50,    #1
        hidden_dim=400,    #2
        use_cuda=USE_CUDA,
    ):
        super().__init__()
        self.use_cuda = use_cuda
        self.z_dim = z_dim
        self.hidden_dim = hidden_dim
        self.setup_networks()
    def setup_networks(self):     #3
        self.encoder = Encoder(self.z_dim, self.hidden_dim)
        self.decoder = Decoder(self.z_dim, self.hidden_dim)
        if self.use_cuda:
            self.cuda()
    model = model     #4
    training_model = training_model    #4
    training_guide = training_guide    #4
#1 Set the latent dimension to 50.
#2 Set the hidden layers to have a dimension of 400.
#3 Set up the encoder and decoder.
#4 Add in the methods for model, training_model, and training_guide.
Having specified the VAE, we can now move on to training.
5.2.3 The training procedure
We know we have a good generative model when the
encoder can encode an image into a latent value of Z, and
then decode it into a reconstructed version of the image. We
can minimize the reconstruction error—the difference
between original and reconstructed images—in the training
data.

A BIT OF PERSPECTIVE ON THE “VARIATIONAL INFERENCE” TRAINING
ALGORITHM
In this section, you’ll see a bunch of jargon relating to
variational inference, which is the algorithm we’ll use for
training. It helps to zoom out and examine why we’re using
this algorithm. There are many statistical estimators and
algorithms both for fitting neural net weights and other
parameters and for causal inference. One of these is
variational inference.
To be clear, variational inference is not a “causal” idea. It is
just another probabilistic inference algorithm. In this book,
I favor this inference algorithm more than others because
it scales well even when variables in the DAG are latent in
the training data, and it works with deep neural nets and
leverages deep learning frameworks like PyTorch. This
opens the door to reasoning causally about richer
modalities such as text, images, video, etc., whereas
traditional causal inference estimators were developed for
numerical data. Further, we can tailor the method to
different problems (see the discussion of “commodification
of inference” in chapter 1) and leverage domain
knowledge during inference (such as by using knowledge
of conditional independence in the guide). Finally, the core
concepts of variational inference show up across many
deep generative modeling approaches (such as latent
diffusion models).
In practice, solely minimizing reconstruction error leads to
overfitting and other issues, so we’ll opt for a probabilistic
approach: given an image, we’ll use our guide function to
sample a value of Z from P(Z|image, is-handwritten, digit).
Then we’ll plug that value into our model’s decoder, and the
output parameterizes P(image|is-handwritten, digit, Z). Our

probabilistic approach to minimizing reconstruction error
optimizes the encoder and decoder such that we’ll maximize
the likelihood of Z with respect to P(Z|image, is-handwritten,
digit) and the likelihood of the original image with respect to
P(image|is-handwritten, digit, Z).
But typically we can’t directly sample from or get likelihoods
from the distribution P(Z|image, is-handwritten, digit). So,
instead, our guide function attempts to approximate it. The
guide represents a variational distribution, denoted Q(Z|X, is-
handwritten, digit). A change in the weights of the encoder
represents a shifting of the variational distribution. Training
will optimize the weights of the encoder such that the
variational distribution shifts toward P(Z|image, is-
handwritten, digit). That training approach is called
variational inference, and it works by minimizing the
Kullback–Leibler divergence (KL divergence) between the
two distributions; KL divergence is a way of quantifying how
two distributions differ.
Our variational inference procedure optimizes a quantity
called ELBO, which means expected lower bound on the log-
likelihood of the data. Minimizing negative ELBO loss
indirectly minimizes reconstruction error and KL divergence
between Q(Z|…) and P(Z|…). Pyro implements ELBO in a
utility called Trace_ELBO.
Our procedure will use stochastic variational inference (SVI),
which simply means doing variational inference with a
training procedure that works with randomly selected
subsets of the data, or “batches”, rather than the full
dataset, which reduces memory use and helps scale to larger
data.

KEY VAE CONCEPTS SO FAR
Variational autoencoder (VAE)—A popular framework in
deep generative modeling. We’re using it to model a
causal Markov kernel in our causal model.
Decoder—We use the decoder as the model of the causal
Markov kernel. It maps the observed causes is-handwritten
and digit, and the latent variable Z, to our image outcome
variable X.
Encoder—The encoder maps the image, digit, and is-
handwritten to the parameters of a distribution where we
can draw samples of Z.
Guide function—During training, we want values of Z that
represent an image, given is-handwritten and digit; i.e., we
want to generate Zs from P(Z|image, is-handwritten, digit).
But we can’t sample from this distribution directly. So we
write a guide function that uses the encoder and
convenient canonical distributions like the multivariate
normal to sample values of Z.
Variational distribution—The guide function represents a
distribution called the variational distribution, denoted
Q(Z|image, is-handwritten, digit). During inference, we
want to sample from Q(Z|…) in a way that is representative
of P(Z|image, is-handwritten, digit).
Variational inference—This is the training procedure that
seeks to maximize the closeness between Q(Z|…) and
P(Z|…) so sampling from Q(Z|…) produces samples
representative of P(Z|…) (e.g., by minimizing KL
divergence).
Stochastic variational inference (SVI)—Variational inference
where training relies on randomly selected subsets of the

data, rather than on the full data, in order to make training
faster and more scalable.
Before we get started, we’ll make a helper function for
plotting images so we can see how we are doing during
training.
Listing 5.10 Helper function for plotting images
def plot_image(img, title=None):     #1
    fig = plt.figure()
    plt.imshow(img.cpu(), cmap='Greys_r', interpolation='nearest')
    if title is not None:
        plt.title(title)
    plt.show()
#1 Helper function for plotting an image
Next, we’ll create a reconstruct_img helper function that will
reconstruct an image, given its labels, where “reconstruct”
means encoding the image into a latent representation and
then decoding the latent representation back into an image.
We can then compare the original image and its
reconstruction to see how well the encoder and decoder
have been trained. We’ll create a compare_images function to
do that comparison.

Listing 5.11 Define a helper function for reconstructing and viewing the
images
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
def reconstruct_img(vae, img, digit, is_hw, use_cuda=USE_CUDA):     #1
    img = img.reshape(-1, 28 * 28)
    digit = F.one_hot(torch.tensor(digit), 10)
    is_hw = torch.tensor(is_hw).unsqueeze(0)
    if use_cuda:
        img = img.cuda()
        digit = digit.cuda()
        is_hw = is_hw.cuda()
    z_loc, z_scale = vae.encoder(img, digit, is_hw)
    z = dist.Normal(z_loc, z_scale).sample()
    img_expectation = vae.decoder(z, digit, is_hw)
    return img_expectation.squeeze().view(28, 28).detach()
def compare_images(img1, img2):    #2
    fig = plt.figure()
    ax0 = fig.add_subplot(121)
    plt.imshow(img1.cpu(), cmap='Greys_r', interpolation='nearest')
    plt.axis('off')
    plt.title('original')
    ax1 = fig.add_subplot(122)
    plt.imshow(img2.cpu(), cmap='Greys_r', interpolation='nearest')
    plt.axis('off')
    plt.title('reconstruction')
    plt.show()
#1 Given an input image, this function reconstructs the image by
passing it through the encoder and then through the decoder.
#2 Plots the two images side by side for comparison
Next, we’ll create some helper functions for handling the
data. We’ll use get_random_example to grab random images
from the dataset. The reshape_data function will convert an
image and its labels into input for the encoder. And we’ll use
generate_data and generate_coded_data to simulate an image
from the model.

Listing 5.12 Data processing helper functions for training
import torch.nn.functional as F
def get_random_example(loader):    #1
    random_idx = np.random.randint(0, len(loader.dataset))    #1
    img, digit, is_handwritten = loader.dataset[random_idx]     #1
    return img.squeeze(), digit, is_handwritten    #1
def reshape_data(img, digit, is_handwritten):     #2
    digit = F.one_hot(digit, 10).squeeze()     #2
    img = img.reshape(-1, 28*28)     #2
    return img, digit, is_handwritten     #2
def generate_coded_data(vae, use_cuda=USE_CUDA):     #3
    z_loc = torch.zeros(1, vae.z_dim)     #3
    z_scale = torch.ones(1, vae.z_dim)     #3
    z = dist.Normal(z_loc, z_scale).to_event(1).sample()     #3
    p_digit = torch.ones(1, 10)/10     #3
    digit = dist.OneHotCategorical(p_digit).sample()     #3
    p_is_handwritten = torch.ones(1, 1)/2     #3
    is_handwritten = dist.Bernoulli(p_is_handwritten).sample()    #3
    if use_cuda:     #3
        z = z.cuda() #3
        digit = digit.cuda() #3
        is_handwritten = is_handwritten.cuda()     #3
    img = vae.decoder(z, digit, is_handwritten)     #3
    return img, digit, is_handwritten    #3
def generate_data(vae, use_cuda=USE_CUDA):     #4
    img, digit, is_handwritten = generate_coded_data(vae, use_cuda)    #4
    img = img.squeeze().view(28, 28).detach()    #4
    digit = torch.argmax(digit, 1)   #4
    is_handwritten = torch.argmax(is_handwritten, 1)     #4
    return img, digit, is_handwritten     #4
#1 Choose a random example from the dataset.
#2 Reshape the data.
#3 Generate data that is encoded.
#4 Generate (unencoded) data.
Finally, we can run the training procedure. First, we’ll set up
stochastic variational inference. We’ll first set up an instance
of the Adam optimizer, which will handle optimization of the
parameters in training_guide. Then we’ll pass training_model,
training_guide, the optimizer, and the ELBO loss function to
the SVI constructor to get an SVI instance.

Listing 5.13 Set up the training procedure
from pyro.infer import SVI, Trace_ELBO
from pyro.optim import Adam
pyro.clear_param_store()     #1
vae = VAE()    #2
train_loader, test_loader = setup_dataloaders(batch_size=256)    #3
svi_adam = Adam({"lr": 1.0e-3})     #4
model = vae.training_model    #5
guide = vae.training_guide    #5
svi = SVI(model, guide, svi_adam, loss=Trace_ELBO())     #5
#1 Clear any values of the parameters in the guide memory.
#2 Initialize the VAE.
#3 Load the data.
#4 Initialize the optimizer.
#5 Initialize the SVI loss calculator. Loss negative “expected lower
bound” (ELBO).
When training generative models, it is useful to set up a
procedure that uses test data to evaluate how well training is
progressing. You can include anything you think is useful to
monitor during training. Here, I calculate and print the loss
function on the test data, just to make sure the test loss is
progressively decreasing along with training loss (a
flattening of test loss while training loss continues to
decrease would indicate overfitting).
A more direct way of determining how well our model is
training is to generate and view images. In my test
evaluation procedure, I produce two visualizations. First, I
inspect how well it can reconstruct a random image from the
test data. I pass the image through the encoder and then
through the decoder, creating a “reconstruction” of the
image. Then I plot the original and reconstructed images
side by side and compare them visually, looking to see that
they are close to identical.
Next, I visualize how well it is performing as an overall
generative model by generating and plotting an image from
scratch. I run this code once each time a certain number of
epochs are run.

Listing 5.14 Setting up a test evaluation procedure
def test_epoch(vae, test_loader):
    epoch_loss_test = 0     #1
    for img, digit, is_hw in test_loader:    #1
        batch_size = img.shape[0]    #1
        if USE_CUDA:    #1
            img = img.cuda()    #1
            digit = digit.cuda()     #1
            is_hw = is_hw.cuda()  #1
        img, digit, is_hw = reshape_data(     #1
            img, digit, is_hw     #1
        )   #1
        epoch_loss_test += svi.evaluate_loss(     #1
            img, digit, is_hw, batch_size    #1
        )    #1
    test_size = len(test_loader.dataset)    #1
    avg_loss = epoch_loss_test/test_size     #1
    print("Epoch: {} avg. test loss: {}".format(epoch, avg_loss))     #1
    print("Comparing a random test image to its reconstruction:")    #2
    random_example = get_random_example(test_loader)     #2
    img_r, digit_r, is_hw_r = random_example    #2
    img_recon = reconstruct_img(vae, img_r, digit_r, is_hw_r)     #2
    compare_images(img_r, img_recon)     #2
    print("Generate a random image from the model:")    #3
    img_gen, digit_gen, is_hw_gen = generate_data(vae)    #3
    plot_image(img_gen, "Generated Image")     #3
    print("Intended digit: ", int(digit_gen))    #3
    print("Intended as handwritten: ", bool(is_hw_gen == 1))     #3
#1 Calculate and print test loss.
#2 Compare a random test image to its reconstruction.
#3 Generate a random image from the model.
Now we’ll run the training. For a single epoch, we’ll
iteratively get a batch of data from the training data loader
and pass it to the step method and run a training step. After
a certain number of epochs (a number set by TEST_FREQUENCY),
we’ll use our helper functions to compare a random image to
its reconstruction, as well as simulate an image from scratch
and plot it.

Listing 5.15 Running training and plotting progress
NUM_EPOCHS = 2500
TEST_FREQUENCY = 10
train_loss = []
train_size = len(train_loader.dataset)
for epoch in range(0, NUM_EPOCHS+1):   #1
    loss = 0
    for img, digit, is_handwritten in train_loader:
        batch_size = img.shape[0]
        if USE_CUDA:
            img = img.cuda()
            digit = digit.cuda()
            is_handwritten = is_handwritten.cuda()
        img, digit, is_handwritten = reshape_data(
            img, digit, is_handwritten
        )
        loss += svi.step(    #2
            img, digit, is_handwritten, batch_size     #2
        )     #2
    avg_loss = loss / train_size
    print("Epoch: {} avgs training loss: {}".format(epoch, loss))
    train_loss.append(avg_loss)
    if epoch % TEST_FREQUENCY == 0:    #3
        test_epoch(vae, test_loader)    #3
#1 Run the training procedure for a certain number of epochs.
#2 Run a training step on one batch in one epoch.
#3 The test data evaluation procedure runs every 10 epochs.
Again, see https://www.altdeep.ai/p/causalaibook for a link to
a Jupyter notebook with the full VAE, encoder/decoder, and
training code, including a link for running it in Google Colab.
5.2.4 Evaluating training
At certain points during training, we randomly choose an
image and “reconstruct” it by passing the image through the
encoder to get a latent value of Z, and passing that value
back through the decoder. In one run, the first image I see is
a non-handwritten number 6. Figure 5.12 shows this image
and its reconstruction.
During training, we also simulate random images from the
generative model and plot it. Figure 5.13 shows the first
simulated image in one run—in this case, the number 3.

Figure 5.12 The first attempt to reconstruct an image during training
shows the model has learned something but still has much progress to
make.

Figure 5.13 The first instance of an image generated from the
generative model during training
But the model learns quickly. By 130 epochs, we get the
results in figure 5.14.

After training is complete, we can see a visualization of loss
over training (negative ELBO) in figure 5.15.
The code will train the parameters of the encoder that maps
images and the labels to the latent variable. It will also train
the decoder that maps the latent variable and the labels to
the image. That latent variable is a fundamental feature of
the VAE, but we should take a closer look at how to interpret
the latent variable in causal terms.

Figure 5.14 Reconstructed and randomly generated images from the
model after 130 epochs of training look much better.

Figure 5.15 Test loss as training progresses. The x-axis is the epoch.
5.2.5 How should we causally interpret Z?
I said we can view Z as a “stand-in” for all the independent
latent causes of the object in the image. Z is a
representation we learn from the pixels in the images. It is

tempting to treat that representation like a higher-level
causal abstraction of those latent causes, but it is probably
not doing a great job as a causal abstraction. The
autoencoder paradigm trains an encoder that can take an
image and embed it into a low-dimensional representation Z.
It tries to do so in a way that enables it to reconstruct the
original image as well as possible. In order to reconstruct the
image with little loss, the framework tries to encode as much
information from the original image as it can in that lower
dimensional representation.
A good causal representation, however, shouldn’t try to
capture as much information as possible. Rather, it should
strive to capture only the causal information in the images
and ignore everything else. Indeed, the task of
“disentangling” the causal and non-causal factors in Z is
generally impossible when Z is unsupervised (meaning we
lack labels for Z). However, domain knowledge,
interventions, and semi-supervision can help. See
https://www.altdeep.ai/p/causalaibook for references on
causal representation learning and disentanglement of
causal factors. As we progress through the book, we’ll
develop intuition for what the “causal information” in such a
representation should look like.
5.2.6 Advantages of this causal interpretation
There is nothing inherently causal about our VAE’s setup and
training procedure; it is typical of a vanilla supervised VAE
you’d see in many machine learning settings. The only
causal element of our approach was our interpretation. We
say that the digit and is-handwritten are causes, and Z is a
stand-in for latent causes, and the image is the outcome.
Applying the causal Markov property, our causal model
factorizes the joint distribution into P(Z), P (is-handwritten),

P(digit ), and P(image |Z, is-handwritten, digit ), where the
latter factor is the causal Markov kernel of the image.
What can we do with this causal interpretation? First, we can
use it to improve deep learning and general machine
learning workflows and tasks. We’ll see an example of this
with semi-supervised learning in the next section.
INCORPORATING GENERATIVE AI IN CAUSAL MODELS IS NOT LIMITED
TO VAES
I demonstrated how to use a VAE framework to fit a causal
Markov kernel entailed by a causal DAG, but a VAE was just
one approach to achieving this end. We could have used
another deep probabilistic machine learning framework,
such as a generative adversarial network (GAN) or a
diffusion model.
In this section, we incorporated deep learning into a causal
graphical model. Next, we investigate how to use causal
ideas to enhance deep learning.
5.3 Using causal inference to enhance
deep learning
We can use causal insights to improve how we set up and
train deep learning models. These insights tend to lead to
benefits such as improved sample efficiency (i.e., doing more
with less data), the ability to do transfer learning (using what
a model learned in solving one task to improve performance
on another), data fusion (combining different datasets), and
enabling more robust predictions.

Much of the work of deep learning is trial and error. For
example, when training a VAE or other deep learning models,
you typically experiment with different approaches (VAE vs.
another framework), architectural choices (latent variable
and hidden layer dimension, activation functions, number of
layers, etc.), and training approaches (choice of loss
function, learning rate, optimizer, etc.) before you get a good
result. These experiments cost time, effort, and resources. In
some cases, causal modeling can help you make better
choices about what might work and what is unlikely to work,
leading to cost savings. In this section, we’ll look at a
particular example of this case in the context of semi-
supervised learning.
5.3.1 Independence of mechanism as an
inductive bias
Suppose we had a DAG with two variables: “cause” C and
“outcome” O. The DAG is simply C → O. Our causal Markov
kernels are P(C) and P(O|C). Recall the idea of independence
of mechanism from chapter 3—the causal Markov kernel
P(O|C) represents a mechanism of how the cause C drives
the outcome O. That mechanism is distinct from other
mechanisms in the system, such that changes to those
mechanisms have no effect on P(O|C). Thus, knowing about
P(O|C) tells you nothing about the distribution of the cause
P(C) and vice versa. However, knowing something about the
distribution of the outcome P(O) might tell you something
about the distribution of the cause given the outcome
P(C|O), and vice versa.
To illustrate, consider a scenario where C represents
sunscreen usage and O indicates whether someone has
sunburn. You understand the mechanism by which sunscreen
protects against sunburn (UV rays, SPF levels, regular
application, the perils of sweat and swimming, etc.), and by

extension, the chances of getting sunburn given how one
uses sunscreen, captured by P(O|C). However, this
understanding of the mechanism doesn’t provide any
information about how common sunscreen use is, denoted
by P(C).
Now, suppose you’re trying to guess whether a sunburned
person used sunscreen, i.e., you’re mentally modeling
P(C|O). In this case, knowing the prevalence of sunburns,
P(O), could help. Consider whether the sunburned individual
was a case of someone who did use sunscreen but got a
sunburn anyway. That case would be more likely if sunburns
were a common problem than if sunburns were rare—if
sunburns are common, sunscreen use is probably common,
but if sunburns were uncommon, people would be less
cautious about prevention.
Similarly, suppose C represents study effort and O represents
test scores. You know the causal mechanism behind how
studying more causes higher test scores, captured by P(O|C).
But this doesn’t tell you how common it is for students to
study hard, captured by P(C). Suppose a student got a low
test score, and you are trying to infer whether they studied
hard—you are mentally modeling P(C|O). Again, knowing the
typical distribution of test scores P(O) can help. If low scores
are rare, students might be complacent, and thus more likely
not to study hard. You can use that insight as an inductive
bias—a way to constrain your mental model of P(C|O).

CAUSAL INDUCTIVE BIAS
“Inductive bias” refers to the assumptions (explicit or
implicit) that lead an inference algorithm to prefer certain
inferences or predictions over others. Examples of
inductive bias include Occam’s Razor and the assumption
in forecasting that trends in the past will continue into the
future.
Modern deep learning relies on using neural network
architectures and training objectives to encode inductive
bias. For example, “convolutions” and “max pooling” are
architectural elements in convolutional neural networks for
computer vision that encode an inductive bias called
“translation invariance”; i.e., a kitten is still a kitten
regardless of whether it appears on the left or right of an
image.
Causal models provide inductive biases in the form of
causal assumptions about the DGP (such as a causal DAG).
Deep learning can leverage these causal inductive biases
to attain better results just as it does with other types of
inductive biases. For example, independence of
mechanism suggests that knowing P(O) could provide a
useful inductive bias in learning P(C|O).
Now consider two variables X and Y (which can be vectors)
with joint distribution P (X, Y ). We want to design an
algorithm that solves a task by learning from data observed
from P (X, Y ). The chain rule of probability tells us that
P(X=x, Y=y) = P (X = x |Y = y)P (Y = y) = P (Y = y |X = x)P (X = 
x). So, from that basic probabilistic perspective, modeling
the set {P (X |Y  ), P (Y  )} is equivalent to modeling the set {P 
(Y  |X ), P (X )}. But consider the cases where either X is a
cause of Y or where Y is a cause of X. Under these

circumstances, the independence of mechanism gives us an
asymmetry between sets {P (X |Y  ), P(Y  )} and {P (Y  |X ), P 
(X )} (specifically, {P (Y  |X ), P (X )} represents the
independent mechanism behind X’s causal influence on Y,
and {P (X |Y  ), P(Y  )} does not) that we can possibly leverage
as an inductive bias in these algorithms. Semi-supervised
learning is a good example.
5.3.2 Case study: Semi-supervised learning
Returning to our TMNIST-MNIST VAE-based causal model,
suppose we had, in addition to our original data, a large set
of images of digits that were unlabeled (i.e., digit and is-
handwritten are not observed). Our causal interpretation of
our model suggests we can leverage this data during
training using semi-supervised learning.
Independence of mechanism can help you determine when
semi-supervised learning will be effective. In supervised
learning, the training data consists of N samples of X, Y
pairs; (x1, y1), (x2, y2), …, (xN, yN). X is the feature data used
to predict the labels Y. The data is “supervised” because
every x is paired with a y. We can use these pairs to learn P 
(Y  |X  ). In unsupervised learning, the data X is unsupervised,
meaning we have no labels, no observed value of Y. Our data
looks like (x1), (x2), …, (xN). With this data alone, we can’t
directly learn anything about P (Y  |X  ); we can only learn
about P (X  ). Semi-supervised learning asks the question,
suppose we had a combination of supervised and
unsupervised data. Could these two sets of data be
combined in a way such that our ability to predict Y was
better than if we only used the supervised data? In other
words, can learning more about P (X  ) from the unsupervised
data somehow augment our learning of P (Y  |X  ) from the
supervised data?

The semi-supervised question is quite practical. It is common
to have abundant unsupervised examples if labeling those
examples is costly. For example, suppose you worked at a
social media site and were tasked with building an algorithm
that classified whether an uploaded image depicted
gratuitous violence. The first step is to create supervised
data by having humans manually label images as
gratuitously violent or not. Not only does this cost many
people-hours, but it is mentally stressful for the labelers. A
successful semi-supervised approach would mean you could
minimize the amount of labeling work you need to do.
Our task is to learn a representation of P (X , Y) and use it to
predict from P (Y  |X  ). For semi-supervised learning to work,
the unlabeled values of X must update the representation of
P (X , Y) in a way that provides information about P (Y  |X  ).
However, independence of mechanism means the task of
learning P (X , Y) decomposes into learning distinct
representations of the causal Markov kernels, where the
parameter vector of each representation is orthogonal to the
others. That parameter modularity (see section 3.2) can
block flow of parameter updating information from the
unlabeled observations of X to the learned representation of
P (Y  |X  ). To illustrate, let's consider two possibilities, one
where Y is a cause of X, and one where X is a cause of Y. If Y
is a cause of X, such as in our MNIST-TMNIST example (Y is
the is-handwritten and digit variables, and X is the image),
then our learning task decomposes into learning distinct
representations of P (X  |Y  ) and P(Y). Unlabeled observations
of X can give us a better representation of P (X  ), we can use
to flip P (X  |Y  ) into P (Y  |X  ) by way of Bayes rule. However,
when X is a cause of Y, our learning task decomposes into
learning distinct representations of P (X  ) and P (Y  |X  ). That
parameter modularity means those unlabeled values of X will
help us update P (X  )’s representation but not that of P 
(Y  |X  ).

Figure 5.16 In causal learning, the features cause the label. In anti-
causal learning, the label causes the features.
The case where the feature causes the label is sometimes
called causal learning because the direction of the prediction
is from the cause to the effect. Anti-causal learning refers to
the case when the label causes the feature. The two cases
are illustrated in figure 5.16.
Independence of mechanism suggests semi-supervised
learning can achieve performance gains (relative to a
baseline of supervised learning on only the labeled data)
only in the anti-causal case. See the chapter notes at
www.altdeep.ai/causalAIbook for a more detailed explanation
and references. But intuitively, we can see that this mirrors
the the sunscreen and sunburn example—knowing the
prevalence of sunburns P (O ) helped in learning how to
guess sunscreen use when you know if someone has a
sunburn P (C |O ). In this same anti-causal learning case,
having only observations from P (X  ) can still be helpful in
learning a good model of P (Y |X  ). But in the causal learning
case, it would be a waste of effort and resources.
In practice, the causal structure between X and Y could be
more nuanced and complicated than these simple X →Y and
X ←Y cases. For example, there could be unobserved
common causes of X and Y. The takeaway here is that when
you know something about the causal relationships between

the variables in your machine learning problem, you can
leverage that knowledge to model more effectively, even if
the task is not a causal inference task (e.g., simply predicting
Y given X  ). This could help you avoid spending time and
resources on an approach that is not likely to work, as in the
semi-supervised case. Or it could enable more efficient,
robust, or better performing inferences.
5.3.3 Demystifying deep learning with causality
Our semi-supervised learning example highlights how a
causal perspective can explain when we’d expect semi-
supervised learning to work and when to fail. In other words,
it somewhat demystifies semi-supervised learning.
That mystery around the effectiveness of deep learning
methods led AI researcher Ali Rahimi to compare modern
machine learning to alchemy.
Alchemy worked. Alchemists invented metallurgy, ways
to dye textiles, modern glass-making processes, and
medications. Then again, alchemists also believed they
could cure diseases with leeches and transmute base
metals into gold.
In other words, alchemy works, but alchemists lacked an
understanding of the underlying scientific principles that
made it work when it did. That mystery made it hard to know
when it would fail. As a result, alchemists wasted
considerable effort on dead ends (philosopher’s stones,
immortality elixirs, etc.).

CHAPTER CHECKPOINT
Incorporating deep learning into a causal model:
✓ A causal model of a computer vision problem
✓ Training the deep causal image model
Using causal reasoning to enhance machine learning:
✓ Case study on independence of mechanism and semi-
supervised learning
👉 Demystifying deep learning with causality
Similarly, deep learning “works” in that it achieves good
performance on a wide variety of prediction and inference
tasks. But we often have an incomplete understanding of
why and when it works. That mystery has led to problems
with reproducibility, robustness, and safety. It also leads to
irresponsible applications of AI, such as published work that
attempts to predict behavior (e.g., criminality) from profile
photos. Such efforts are the machine learning analog of the
alchemical immortality elixirs that contained toxins like
mercury; they don’t work and they cause harm.
We often hear about the “superhuman” performance of deep
learning. Speaking of superhuman ability, imagine an
alternative telling of Superman’s origin story. Imagine if,
when Superman made his first public appearance, his
superhuman abilities were unreliable? Suppose he
demonstrated astounding superhuman feats like flight, super
strength, and laser vision, but sometimes his flight ability
failed and his super strength faltered. Sometimes his laser
vision was dangerously unfocused, resulting in terrible

collateral damage. The public would be impressed and
hopeful that he could do some good, but unsure if it would
be safe to rely on him when the stakes were high.
Now imagine that his adoptive Midwestern parents, experts
in causal inference, used causal analysis to model the how
and why of his powers. Having demystified the mechanisms
underlying his superpowers, they were able to engineer a pill
that stabilized those powers. The pill wouldn’t so much give
Superman new powers; it would just make his existing
powers more reliable. The work of developing that pill would
get fewer headlines than flight and laser vision, but it would
be the difference between merely having superpowers and
being Superman.
This analogy helps us understand the impact of using causal
methods to demystify deep learning and other machine
learning methods. Less mystery leads to more robust
methods and helps us avoid wasteful or harmful applications.
Summary
Deep learning can be used to enhance causal modeling
and inference. Causal reasoning can enhance the setup,
training, and performance of deep learning models.
Causal models can leverage the ability of deep learning
to scale and work with high-dimensional nonlinear
relationships.
You can use generative AI frameworks like the variational
autoencoder to build a causal generative model on a
DAG just as we did with pgmpy.
The decoder maps the outcomes of direct parents (the
labels of an image) to the outcomes of the child (the
image).

In other words, the decoder gives us a nonlinear high-
dimensional representation of the causal Markov kernel
for the image.
The encoder maps the image variable and the causes
(labels) back to the latent variable Z.
We can view the learned representation of the latent
variable as a stand-in for unmodeled causes, but it still
lacks the qualities we’d expect from an ideal causal
representation. Learning latent causal representations is
an active area of research.
Causality often enhances deep learning and other
machine learning methods by helping elucidate the
underlying principles that make it work. For example,
causal analysis shows semi-supervised learning should
work in the case of anti-causal learning (when the
features are caused by the label) but not in the case of
causal learning (when the features cause the label).
Such causal insights can help the modeler avoid
spending time, compute, person-hours, and other
resources on a given algorithm when it is not likely to
work in a given problem setting.
Causal insights can demystify elements of building and
training deep learning models, such that they become
more robust, efficient, and safe.

Part 3 The causal
hierarchy
Part 3 takes a code-first deep dive into the core concepts of
causal inference. Readers will explore structural causal
models, interventions, multi-world counterfactual reasoning,
and causal identification—where we determine what kinds
of causal questions you can answer with your model and
your data. This part will prepare you to take on the more
challenging but rewarding aspects of causal inference,
providing practical code-based tools for reasoning about
“what if” scenarios. By the end, you’ll be ready to use
causal inference techniques in real-world decision-making
scenarios, leveraging both generative modeling frameworks
and deep learning tools.

6 Structural causal models
This chapter covers
Converting a general causal graphical model to a structural causal model
Mastering the key elements of SCMs
Implementing SCMs for rule-based systems
Building an SCM from scratch using additive models
Combining SCMs with deep learning
In this chapter, I’ll introduce a fundamental causal modeling approach called the structural
causal model (SCM). An SCM is a special case of a causal generative model that can
encode causal assumptions beyond those we can capture with a DAG. If a DAG tells us
what causes what, an SCM tells us both what causes what and how the causes affect the
effects. We can use that extra “how” information to make better causal inferences.
In this chapter, we’ll focus on defining and building an intuition for SCMs using examples in
code. In later chapters, we’ll see examples of causal inferences that we can’t make with a
DAG alone but we can make with an SCM.
6.1 From a general causal graphical model to an SCM
In the causal generative models we’ve built so far, we defined, for each node, a conditional
probability distribution given the node’s direct parents, which we called a causal Markov
kernel. We then fit these kernels using data. Specifically, we made a practical choice to use
some parametric function class to fit these kernels. For example, we fit the parameters of a
probability table using pgmpy’s TabularCPD because it let us work with pgmpy’s convenient
d-separation and inference utilities. And we used a neural decoder in a VAE architecture
because it solved the problem of modeling a high-dimensional variable like an image.
These practical reasons have nothing to do with causality; our causal assumptions stopped
at the causal DAG.
Now, with SCMs, we’ll use the parametric function class to capture additional causal
assumptions beyond the causal DAG. As I said, the SCM lets us represent additional
assumptions of how causes affect their effects; for example, that a change in the cause
always leads to a proportional change in the effect. Indeed, a probability table or a neural
network can be too flexible to capture assumptions about the “how” of causality; with
enough data they can fit anything and thus don’t imply strong assumptions. More causal
assumptions enable more causal inferences, at the cost of additional risk of modeling error.
SCMs are a special case of causal graphical models (CGMs)—one with more constraints
than the CGMs we’ve built so far. For clarity, I’ll use CGM to refer to the broader set of
causal graphical models that are not SCMs. To make the distinction clear, let’s start by
looking at how we might modify a CGM so it satisfies the constraints of an SCM.
6.1.1 Forensics case study
Imagine you are a forensic scientist working for the police. The police discover decomposed
human remains consisting of a skull, pelvic bone, several ribs, and a femur. An apparent
blunt force trauma injury to the skull leads the police to open a murder investigation. First,
they need you to help identify the victim.

When the remains arrive in your lab, you measure and catalog the bones. From the shape
of the pelvis, you can quickly tell that the remains most likely belong to an adult male. You
note that the femur is 45 centimeters long. As you might suspect, there is a strong
predictive relationship between femur length and an individual’s overall height. Moreover,
that relationship is causal. Femur length is a cause of height. Simply put, having a long
femur makes you taller, and having a short femur makes you shorter.
Indeed, when you consult your forensic text, it says that height is a linear function of femur
length. It provides the following probabilistic model of height, given femur length (in
males):
ny ~ N(0, 3.3)
y  = 25 + 3x + ny
Here, x is femur length in centimeters, and y is height in centimeters. Of course, exact
height will vary with other causal factors, and ny represents variations in height from those
factors. Ny has a normal distribution with mean 0 and scale parameter 3.3 cm.
This is an example of an SCM. We’ll expand this example as we go, but the key element to
focus on here is that our model is assuming the causal mechanism underpinning height (Y  )
is linear. Height (Y  ) is a linear function of its causes, femur length (X ) and Ny, which
represents other causal determinants of height.
Linear modeling is an attractive choice because it is simple, stands on centuries of theory,
and is supported by countless statistical and linear algebra software libraries. But from a
causal perspective, that’s beside the point. Our SCM is not using this linear function
because it is convenient. Rather, we are intentionally asserting that the relationship
between the cause and the effect is linear—that for a change in femur length, there is a
proportional change in height.
Let’s drill down on this example to highlight the differences between a CGM and an SCM.
6.1.2 Converting to an SCM via reparameterization
In this section, we will start by converting the type of CGM we’ve become familiar with into
an SCM. Our conversion exercise will highlight those properties and make clear the
technical structure of the SCM and how it differs relative to the CGMs we’ve seen so far.
Note, however, that this “conversion” is intended to build intuition; in general, you should
build your SCM from scratch rather than try to shoehorn non-SCMs into SCMs, for reasons
we’ll see in section 6.2.
Let’s suppose our forensic SCM were a CGM. We might implement it as in figure 6.1.
Figure 6.1 A simple two-node CGM. Femur length (X) is a cause of height (Y). X has a normal distribution
with a mean of 47 centimeters and a standard deviation of 2.3 centimeters. Y has a distribution with a
mean of 25 + 3x centimeters and a standard deviation of 3.3 centimeters.
Recall from chapter 2 that x ~ P (X  ) and y ~ P (Y  |X=x ) means we generate from the
probability distribution of X and conditional probability distribution of Y given X. In this

case, P (X  ), the distribution of femur length, represented as a normal distribution with a
mean of 47 centimeters and a standard deviation of 2.3 centimeters. P (Y  |X=x ) is the
distribution on height given the femur length, given as a normal distribution with a mean of
25 + 3x centimeters and a standard deviation of 3.3 centimeters. We would implement this
model in Pyro as follows in listing 6.1.
SETTING UP YOUR ENVIRONMENT
The code in this chapter was written using Python version 3.10, Pyro version 1.9.0,
pgmpy version 0.1.25, and torch 2.3.0. See https://www.altdeep.ai/p/causalaibook for
links to the notebooks that run the code. We are also using MATLAB for some plotting;
this code was tested with version 3.7.
Listing 6.1 Pyro pseudocode of the CGM in figure 6.1
from pyro.distributions import Normal
from pyro import sample
def cgm_model():    #1
    x = sample("x", Normal(47., 2.3))   #1
    y = sample("y", Normal(25. + 3*x, 3.3))   #1
    return x, y    #2
#1 x and y are sampled from their causal Markov kernels, in this case normal distributions.
#2 Repeatedly calling cgm_model will return samples from P(X, Y).
We are going to convert this model to an SCM using the following algorithm:
1. Introduce a new latent causal parent for X called Nx and a new latent causal parent for
Y called Ny with distributions P(Nx) and P(Ny).
2. Make X and Y deterministic functions of Nx and Ny such that P(X, Y) in this new model is
the same as in the old model.
Following these instructions and adding in two new variables, we get figure 6.2.
Figure 6.2 To convert the CGM to an SCM, we introduce latent “exogenous” parents, Nx for X and Ny for Y,
and probability distributions P(Nx) and P(Ny) for these latents. We then set X and Y deterministically, given
their parents, via functions fx and fy.
We have two new latent variables Nx and Ny with distributions P (Nx) and P (Ny). X and Y
each have their own functions fx and fy that that deterministically set X and Y, given their
parents in the graph. This difference is key; X and Y are generated in the model described
in figure 6.1 but set deterministically in this new model. To emphasize this, I use the
assignment operator “:=” instead of the equal sign “=” to emphasize that fx and fy assign
the values of X and Y.
To meet our goal of converting our CGM to an SCM, we want P (X  ) and P (Y  |X =x ) to be the
same across both models. To achieve this, we have to choose P (Nx), P (Ny), fx, and fy such
that P (X  ) is still Normal(47, 2.3) and P (Y  |X = x ) is still Normal(25 + 3.3x, 3.3). One option

is to do a simple reparameterization. Linear functions of normally distributed random
variables are also normally distributed. We can implement the model in figure 6.3.
Figure 6.3 A simple reparameterization of the original CGM produces a new SCM model with the same P(X)
and P(Y|X) as the original.
In code, we rewrite this as follows.
Listing 6.2 CGM rewritten as an SCM
from pyro.distributions import Normal
from pyro import sample
def scm_model():
    n_x = sample("n_x", Normal(0., 2.3))    #1
    n_y = sample("n_y", Normal(0., 3.3))   #1
    x = 47. + n_x     #2
    y = 25. + 3.*x + n_y    #2
    return x, y    #3
#1 We sample these new latent variables from a standard normal distribution.
#2 X and Y are calculated deterministically as linear transformations of n_x and n_y.
#3 The returned samples of P(X, Y) match the first model.
With this introduction of new exogenous variables Nx and Ny, some linear functions fx and
fy, and a reparameterization, we converted the CGM to an SCM that encodes the same
distribution P (X, Y  ). Next, let’s look more closely at the elements we introduced.
6.1.3 Formalizing the new model
To build an SCM, we’re going to assume we’ve already built a causal DAG, as in figure 6.1.
In figures 6.2 and 6.3, we see two kinds of variables: exogenous and endogenous. The
endogenous variables are the original variables X and Y—we’ll define them as the variables
we are modeling explicitly. These are the variables we included in our causal DAG.
The exogenous variables (also called noise variables) are our new nodes Nx and Ny. These
variables represent all unmodeled causes of our endogenous variables. In our formulation,
we pair each of the endogenous variable with its own exogenous variable parent; X gets
new exogenous causal parent Nx, and Y gets exogenous parent Ny. We add these to our
DAG for completeness as in figures 6.2 and 6.3.
In our formulation, we’ll assume exogenous variables have no parents and have no edges
between one another. In other words, they are root nodes in the graph, and they are
independent relative to other exogenous variables. Further, we’ll treat the exogenous
variables as latent variables.
Each endogenous variable also gets its own assignment function (also called a structural
assignment) fx, and fy. The assignment function deterministically sets the value of the
endogenous variables X and Y given values of their parents in the causal DAG.
Assignment functions are how we capture assumptions about the “how” of causality. For
instance, to say that the causal relationship between height (Y  ) and femur length (X  ) is

linear, we specify that fx is a linear function.
While the endogenous variables are set deterministically, the SCM generates the values of
the exogenous variables from probability distributions. In our femur example, we generate
values nx and ny of exogenous variables Nx and Ny from distributions P (Nx) and P (Ny),
which are N (0, 2.3) and N (0, 3.3), as seen in figure 6.3.
ELEMENTS OF THE GENERATIVE SCM
A set of endogenous variables (e.g., X, Y)—These are the variables we want to model
explicitly. They are the models we build into our causal DAG.
A set of exogenous variables (e.g., Nx and Ny)—These variables stand in for
unmodeled causes of the endogenous variables. In our formulation, each endogenous
variable has one corresponding latent exogenous variable.
A set of assignment functions (e.g., fx and fy)—Each endogenous variable has an
assignment function that sets its value deterministically given its parents (its
corresponding exogenous variable and other endogenous variables).
A set of exogenous variable probability distributions (e.g., P(Nx) and P(Ny))—The SCM
becomes a generative model with a set of distributions on the exogenous variables.
Given values generated from these distributions, the endogenous variables are set
deterministically.
Let’s look at another example of an SCM, this time using discrete variables.
6.1.4 A discrete, imperative example of an SCM
Our femur example dealt with continuous variables like height and length. Let’s now return
to our rock-throwing example from chapter 2 and consider a discrete case of an SCM. In
this example, either Jenny or Brian or both throw a rock at window if they are inclined to do
so. The window breaks depending on whether either or both Jenny and Brian throw and the
strength of the windowpane.
How might we convert this model to an SCM? In fact, this model is already an SCM. We
captured this with the following code.

Listing 6.3 The rock-throwing example from chapter 2 is an SCM
import pandas as pd
import random
def true_dgp(
    jenny_inclination,     #1
    brian_inclination,     #1
    window_strength):     #1
    jenny_throws_rock = jenny_inclination > 0.5     #2
    brian_throws_rock = brian_inclination > 0.5    #2
    if jenny_throws_rock and brian_throws_rock:     #3
        strength_of_impact = 0.8     #3
    elif jenny_throws_rock or brian_throws_rock:     #3
        strength_of_impact = 0.6     #3
    else:     #3
        strength_of_impact = 0.0    #3
    window_breaks = window_strength < strength_of_impact    #4
    return jenny_throws_rock, brian_throws_rock, window_breaks
generated_outcome = true_dgp(
    jenny_inclination=random.uniform(0, 1),  #5
    brian_inclination=random.uniform(0, 1),  #5
    window_strength=random.uniform(0, 1)   #5
)
#1 The input values are instances of exogenous variables.
#2 Jenny and Brian throw the rock if so inclined. jenny_throws_rock and brian_throws_rock are endogenous
variables.
#3 strength_of_impact is an endogenous variable. This entire if-then expression is the assignment function
for strength of impact.
#4 window_breaks is an endogenous variable. The assignment function is lambda strength_of_impact,
window_strength: strength_of_impact &gt; window_strength.
#5 Each exogenous variable has a Uniform(0, 1) distribution.
You’ll see that it satisfies the requirements of an SCM. The arguments to the true_dgp
function (namely jenny_inclination, brian_inclination, window_strength) are the exogenous
variables. The named variables inside the function are the endogenous variables, which are
set deterministically by the exogenous variables.
Most SCMs you’ll encounter in papers and textbooks are written down as math. However,
this rock-throwing example shows us the power of reasoning causally with an imperative
scripting language like Python. Some causal processes are easier to write in code than in
math. It is only recently that tools such as Pyro have allowed us to make sophisticated
code-based SCMs.
6.1.5 Why use SCMs?
More causal assumptions mean more ability to make causal inferences. The question of
whether to use an SCM instead of a regular CGM is equivalent to asking whether the
additional causal assumptions encoded in the functional assignments will serve your causal
inference goal.
In our femur example, our DAG says femur length causes height. Our SCM goes further and
says that for every unit increase in femur length, there is a proportional increase in height.
The question is whether that additional information helps us answer a causal question. One
example where such a linear assumption helps make a causal inference is the use of
instrumental variable estimation of causal effects, which I’ll discuss in chapter 11. This
approach relies on linearity assumptions to infer causal effects in cases where the
assumptions in the DAG alone are not sufficient to make the inference. Another example is
where an SCM can enable us to answer counterfactual queries using an algorithm
discussed in chapter 9.
Of course, if your causal inference is relying on an assumption, and that assumption is
incorrect, your inference will probably be incorrect. The “what” assumptions in a DAG are
simpler than the additional “how” assumptions in an SCM. An edge in a DAG is a true or
false statement that X causes Y. An assignment function in an SCM model is a statement

about how X causes Y. The latter assumption is more nuanced and quite hard to validate,
so it’s easier to get incorrect. Consider the fact that there are longstanding drugs on the
market that we know work, but we don’t fully understand their mechanism of action—how
they work.
6.1.6 Differences from related approaches
SCMs have a rich history across different fields. You may have seen formulations that are
similar to but nonetheless different from what we’ve laid out here. Here, we’ll highlight the
differentiating elements of this formulation and why they matter to us.
GENERATIVE SCMS WITH LATENT EXOGENOUS VARIABLES
We want to use our SCMs as generative models. To that end, we treat exogenous variables
(variables we don’t want to model explicitly) as latent proxies for unmodeled causes of the
endogenous variables. We just need to specify probability distributions of the exogenous
variables and we get a generative latent variable model.
FLEXIBLE SELECTION OF ASSIGNMENT FUNCTIONS
You’ll find that the most common applications of SCMs use linear functions as assignment
functions, like we did in the femur example. However, in a generative AI setting, we
certainly don’t want to constrain ourselves to linear models. We want to work with rich
function classes we can write as code, optimize with automatic differentiation, and apply to
high-dimensional nonlinear problems, like images. These function classes can do just as
well in representing the “how” of causality.
CONNECTION TO THE DAG
We contextualize the SCM within the DAG-based view of causality. First, we build a causal
DAG as in chapters 3 and 4. Each variable in the DAG becomes an endogenous variable (a
variable we want to model explicitly) in the SCM. For each endogenous variable, we add a
single latent exogenous parent node to the DAG. Next, we define “assignment function” as
a function that assigns a given endogenous variable a value, given the values of its parents
in the DAG. All of our DAG-based theory still applies, such as the causal Markov property
and independence of mechanism.
Note that not all formulations of the SCM adhere so closely to the DAG. Some practitioners
who don’t adopt a graphical view of causality still use SCM-like models (e.g., structural
equation modeling in econometrics). And some variations of graphical SCMs allow us to
relax acyclicity and work with cycles and feedback loops.
INDEPENDENT EXOGENOUS VARIABLES
Introducing one exogenous variable for every endogenous variable can be a nuisance;
sometimes it is easier to treat a node with no parents in the original DAG as exogenous, or
have the same exogenous parent for two endogenous nodes. But this approach lets us add
exogenous variables in a way that maintains the d-separations entailed by the original
DAG. It also allows us to make a distinction between endogenous variables we care to
model explicitly, and all the exogenous causes we don’t want to model explicitly. This
comes in handy when, for example, you’re building a causal image model like in chapter 5,
and you don’t want to explicitly represent all the many causes of the appearance of an
image.

6.1.7 Causal determinism and implications to how we model
The defining element of the SCM is that endogenous variables are set deterministically by
assignment functions instead of probabilistically by drawing randomly from a distribution
conditioned on causal parents. This deterministic assignment reflects the philosophical
view of causal determinism, which argues that if you knew all the causal factors of an
outcome, you would know the outcome with complete certainty.
The SCM stands on this philosophical foundation. Consider again our femur-height example,
shown in figure 6.4.
Figure 6.4 The original CGM samples endogenous variables from causal Markov kernels. The new model sets
the endogenous variables deterministically.
In the original CGM on the left of figure 6.4, we generate values of X and Y from models of
their causal Markov kernels. In the corresponding SCM on the right, the endogenous
variables are set deterministically, no longer drawn from distributions. The SCM is saying
that given femur length and all the other unmodeled causes of height represented by Ny,
height is a certainty.
Note that despite this deterministic view, the SCM is still a probabilistic model of the joint
probability distribution of the endogenous variables P(X, Y). But in comparison to the CGM
on the left of figure 6.4, the SCM on the right shunts all the randomness of the model to the
exogenous variable distributions. X and Y are still random variables in the SCM, because
they are functions of Nx and Ny, and a function of a random variable is a random variable.
But conditional on the exogenous variables, the endogenous variables are fully determined
(degenerate).
The causal determinism leads to eye-opening conclusions for us as causal modelers. First,
when we apply a DAG-based view of causality to a given problem, we implicitly assume the
ground-truth data generating process (DGP) is an SCM. We already assumed that the
ground-truth DGP had an underlying ground-truth DAG. Going a step further and assuming
that each variable in that DAG is set deterministically, given all its causes (both those in
and outside the DAG), is equivalent to assuming the ground-truth DGP is an SCM. The SCM
might be a black box, or we might not be able to easily write it down in math or code, but it
is an SCM nonetheless. That means, whether we’re using a traditional CGM or an SCM, we
are modeling a ground-truth SCM.
Second, it suggests that if we were to generate from the ground-truth SCM, all the random
variation in those samples would be entirely due to exogenous causes. It would not be due
to an irreducible source of stochasticity like, for example, Heisenberg’s uncertainty
principle or butterfly effects. If such concepts drive the outcomes in your modeling domain,
CGMs might not be the best choice.
Now that we know we want to model a ground-truth SCM, let’s explore why we can’t simply
learn it from data.

6.2 Equivalence between SCMs
A key thing to understand about SCMs is that we can’t fully learn them from data. To see
why, let’s revisit the case where we turned a CGM into an SCM. Let’s see why, in general,
this can’t give us the ground-truth SCM.
6.2.1 Reparameterization is not enough
When we converted the generic CGM to the SCM, we used the fact that a linear
transformation of a normally distributed random variable produces a normally distributed
random variable. This ensured that the joint probability distribution of the endogenous
variables was unchanged.
We could use this “reparameterization trick” (as this technique is called in generative AI)
with other distributions. When we apply the reparameterization trick, we are shunting all
the uncertainty in those conditional probability distributions to the distributions of the
newly introduced exogenous variables. The problem is that different “reparameterization
tricks” can lead to different SCMs with different causal assumptions, leading to different
causal inferences.
REPARAMETERIZATION TRICK FOR A BERNOULLI DISTRIBUTION
As an example, let X represent the choice of a weighted coin and Y represent the outcome
of a flip of the chosen coin. Y is 1 if we flip heads and 0 if we flip tails. X takes two values,
“coin A” or “coin B”. Coin A has a .8 chance of flipping heads, and coin B has a .4 chance of
flipping heads, as shown in figure 6.5.
Figure 6.5 A simple CGM. X is a choice of one of two coins with different weights on heads and tails. Y is the
outcome of the coin flip (heads or tails).
We can simulate an outcome of the flip with a variable Y sampled from a Bernoulli
distribution with parameter px, where px is .8 or .4, depending on the value of x.
y ~ Bernoulli(px)
How could we apply the reparameterization trick here to make the outcome Y be the result
of a deterministic process?
Imagine that we have a stick that’s one meter long (figure 6.6).
Figure 6.6 To turn the coin flip model into an SCM, first imagine a one meter long stick.

Imagine using a pocket knife to carve a mark that partitions the stick into two regions: one
corresponding to “tails” and one for “heads.” We cut the mark at a point that makes the
length of each region proportional to the probability of the corresponding outcome; the
length of the heads region is px meters, and the length of the tails region is 1 – px meters.
For coin A, this would be .8 meters (80 centimeters) for the heads region and .2 meters for
the tails region (figure 6.7).
Figure 6.7 Divide the stick into two regions corresponding to each outcome. The length of the region is
proportional to the probability of the outcome.
After marking the partition, we will now randomly select a point on the stick’s length where
we will break the stick. The probability that the break will occur in a given region is equal to
the probability of that region’s associated outcome (figure 6.8). The equality comes from
having the length of the region correspond to the probability of the outcome. If the break
point is to the left of the partition we cut with our pocket knife, y is assigned 0 (“heads”),
and if the break point is to the right, y is assigned 1 (“tails”).
To randomly select a point to break the stick, we can generate from a uniform distribution.
Suppose we sample .15 from a uniform(0, 1) and thus break the stick at a point .15 meters
along its length, as shown in figure 6.8. The .15 falls into the “heads” region, so we return
heads. If we repeat this stick-breaking procedure many times, we’ll get samples from our
target Bernoulli distribution.
In math, we can write this new model as follows:
ny ~ Uniform(0, 1)
y : = I(ny ≤ px)
where px is .8 if X is coin A, or .4 if X is coin B. Here, I(.) is the indicator function that
returns 1 if ny < px and 0 otherwise.

Figure 6.8 Generate from a uniform distribution on 0 to 1 meters, break the stick at that point, and return
the outcome associated with the region where the break occurred. Repeated generation of uniform variates
will cause breaks in the “heads” region 80% of the time, because its length is 80% of the full stick length.
This new model is technically an SCM, because instead of Y being generated from a
Bernoulli distribution, it is set deterministically by an indicator “assignment” function. We
did a reparameterization that shunted all the randomness to an exogenous variable with a
uniform distribution, and that variable is passed to the assignment function.
DIFFERENT “REPARAMETERIZATION TRICKS” LEAD TO DIFFERENT SCMS
The main reason to use SCM modeling is to have the functional assignments represent
causal assumptions beyond those captured by the causal DAG. The problem with the
reparameterization trick is that different reparameterization tricks applied to the same
CGM will create SCMs with different assignment functions, implying different causal
assumptions.
To illustrate, suppose that instead of a coin flip, Y was a three-sided die, like we saw in
chapter 2 (figure 6.9). X determines which die we’ll throw; die A or die B (figure 6.10). Each
die is weighted differently, so they have different probabilities of rolling a 1, 2, or 3.
Figure 6.9 Three-sided dice

Figure 6.10 Suppose we switch the model from choosing a coin (two outcomes) to choosing a three-sided
die (three outcomes).
We can extend the original model from a Bernoulli distribution (which is the same as a
categorical distribution with two outcomes) to a categorical distribution with three
outcomes:
y ~ Categorical([px1, px2, px3])
where px1, px2, and px3 are the probabilities of rolling a 1, 2, and 3 respectively (note that
one of these is redundant, since px1 = 1 – px2 – px3).
We can use the stick-based reparameterization trick here as well; we just need to extend
the stick to have one more region. Suppose for die A, the probability of rolling a 1 is px1=.1,
rolling a 2 is px2=.3, and rolling a 3 is px3=.6. We’ll mark our stick as in figure 6.11.
Figure 6.11 Divide the stick into three regions corresponding to outcomes of the three-sided die.
We’ll then use the same selection of a remote region using a generated uniform variate as
before (figure 6.12).
Figure 6.12 The conversion to the stick-breaking SCM when Y has three outcomes
In math we’ll write this as follows:

But what if we mark the stick differently, such that we change the ordering of the regions
on the stick? In the second stick, the region order is 3, 1, and then 2 (figure 6.13).
Figure 6.13 Two different ways of reparameterizing a causal generative model yield two different SCMs.
They encode the same joint probability distribution but different endogenous values given the same
exogenous value.
In terms of the probability of each outcome (1, 2, or 3), the two sticks are equivalent—the
size of the stick regions assigned to each die-roll outcome are the same on both sticks. But
our causal mechanism has changed! These two sticks can return different outcomes for a
given value of ny. If we randomly draw .15 and thereby break the sticks at the .15 meter
point, the first stick will break in region 2, returning a 2, and the second stick will break in
region 3, returning a 3.
In math, the second stick-breaking SCM has this form:
Metaphorically speaking, imagine that in your modeling domain, the sticks are always
marked a certain way, with the regions ordered in a certain way. Then there is no
guarantee that a simple reparameterization trick will give you the ground-truth marking.

To drive the point home, let’s look back at the reparameterization trick we performed to
convert our femur-height model to an SCM (figure 6.14).
Figure 6.14 Revisiting the femur-height SCM
Suppose we create a new SCM that is the same, except that the assignment function for y
now looks like this:
y := 25 + 3x – ny
Now we have a second SCM that subtracts ny instead of adding ny. A normal distribution is
symmetric around its mean, so since ny has a normal distribution with mean 0, the
probability values of ny and –ny are the same, so the probability distribution of Y is the
same in both models. But for the same values of ny and x, the actual assigned values of y
will be different. Next, we’ll examine this idea in formal detail.
6.2.2 Uniqueness and equivalence of SCMs
Given a causal DAG and a joint probability distribution on endogenous variables, there can
generally be multiple SCMs consistent with that DAG and joint probability distribution. This
means that we can’t rely on data alone to learn the ground-truth SCM. We’ll explore this
problem of causal identifiability in depth in chapter 10. For now, let’s break this idea down
using concepts we’ve seen so far.
MANY SCMS ARE CONSISTENT WITH A DAG AND CORRESPONDING
DISTRIBUTIONS
Recall the many-to-one relationships we outlined in figure 2.24, shown again here in figure
6.15.
Figure 6.15 We have many-to-one relationships as we move from the DGP to observed data.
If we can represent the underlying DGP as a ground-truth SCM, figure 6.15 becomes as
shown in figure 6.16.

Figure 6.16 Different SCMs can entail the same DAG structure and distributions. The SCMs can differ in
assignment functions (and/or exogenous distributions).
In other words, given a joint distribution on a set of variables, there can be multiple causal
DAGs consistent with that distribution—in chapter 4 we called these DAGs a Markov
equivalence class. Further, we can have equivalence classes of SCMs—given a causal DAG
and a joint distribution, there can be multiple SCMs consistent with that DAG and
distribution. We saw this with how the two variants of the stick-breaking die-roll SCM are
both consistent with the DAG X (die choice) → Y (die roll) and with the distributions P (X  )
(probability distribution on die selection) and P (Y  |X  ) (probability of die roll).
THE GROUND-TRUTH SCM CAN’T BE LEARNED FROM DATA (WITHOUT CAUSAL
ASSUMPTIONS)
When we were working to build a causal DAG in previous chapters, our implied objective
was to reproduce the ground-truth causal DAG. Now we seek to reproduce the ground-truth
SCM, as in figure 6.16.
In chapter 4, we saw that data cannot distinguish between causal DAGs in an equivalence
class of DAGs. Similarly, data alone is not sufficient to recover the ground-truth SCM. Again,
consider the stick-breaking SCMs we derived. We derived two marked sticks, with two
different orderings of regions. Of course, there are 3 × 2 × 1 = 6 ways of ordering the three
outcomes: ({1, 2, 3}, {1, 3, 2}, {2, 1, 3}, {2, 3, 2}, {3, 1, 2}, {3, 2, 1}). That’s six ways of
marking the stick and thus six different possible SCMs consistent with the distributions P 
(X  ) and P(Y  |X  ) (probability of die roll).
Suppose one of these marked sticks was the ground-truth SCM, and it was hidden from us
in a black box, as in figure 6.17. Suppose we repeatedly ran the SCM to generate some die
rolls. Based on those die rolls, could we figure out how the ground-truth stick was marked?
In other words, which of the six orderings was the black box ordering?
Figure 6.17 Suppose we didn’t know which “marked stick” was generating the observed die rolls. There
would be no way of inferring the correct marked stick from the die rolls alone. More generally, SCMs cannot
be learned from statistical information in the data alone.
The answer is no. More generally, because of the many-to-one relationship between SCMs
and data, you cannot learn the ground-truth SCM from statistical information in the data
alone.

Let that sink in for a second. I’m telling you that even with infinite data, the most cutting-
edge deep learning architecture, and a bottomless compute budget, you cannot figure out
the true SCM even in this trivial three-outcome stick-breaking example. In terms of
statistical likelihood, each SCM is equally likely, given the data. To prefer one SCM to
another in the equivalence class, you would need additional assumptions, such as that {1,
2, 3} is the most likely marking because the person marking the stick would probably mark
the regions in order. That’s a fine assumption to make, as long as you are aware you are
making it.
In the practice of machine learning, we are often unaware that we are making such
assumptions. To illustrate, suppose you ran the following experiment. You created a bunch
of stick-breaking SCMs and then simulated data from those SCMs. Then you vectorized the
SCMs and used them as labels, and the simulated data as features, in a deep supervised
learning training procedure focused on predicting the “true” SCM from simulated data, as
illustrated in figure 6.18.
Figure 6.18 You create many SCMs and simulate data from each of them. You could then do supervised
learning of a deep net that predicted the ground-truth SCM from the simulated data. Given two SCMs of the
same equivalence class, this approach would favor the SCM with attributes that appeared more often in the
training data.
Suppose then you fed the trained model data actual samples of three-sided die rolls, with
the goal of predicting the ground-truth SCM. That predictive model’s prediction might favor
a stick with the {1, 2, 3} ordering over the equivalent {2, 3, 1} ordering. But it would only
do so if the {1, 2, 3} ordering was more common in the training data.

ANALOGY TO PROGRAM INDUCTION
The problem of learning an SCM from data is related to the challenge of program
induction in computer science. Suppose a program took “foo” and “bar” as inputs and
returned “foobar” as the output. What is the program? You might think that the program
simply concatenates the inputs. But it could be anything, including one that
concatenates the inputs along with the word “aardvark”, then deletes the “aardvark”
characters, and returns the result. The “data” (many examples of inputs to and outputs
of the program) are not enough distinguish which program of all the possible programs is
the correct one. For that you need additional assumptions or constraints, such as an
Occam’s razor type of inductive bias that prefers the simplest program (e.g., the program
with the minimum description length).
Trying to learn an SCM from data is a special case of this problem. The program’s inputs
are the exogenous variable values, and the outputs are the endogenous variable values.
Suppose you have the causal DAG, just not the assignment functions. The problem is that
an infinite number of assignment functions could produce those outputs, given the
inputs. Learning an SCM from data requires additional assumptions to constrain the
assignment functions, such as constraining the function class and using Occam’s razor
(e.g., model selection criterion).
Next, we’ll dive into implementing an SCM in a discrete rule-based setting.
6.3 Implementing SCMs for rule-based systems
A particularly useful application for SCMs is modeling rule-based systems. By “rule-based,”
I mean that known rules, often set by humans, determine the “how” of causality. Games
are a good example.
To illustrate, consider the Monty Hall problem—a probability-based brain teaser named
after the host of a 1960’s game show with a similar setup.
6.3.1 Case study: The Monty Hall problem
A contestant on a game show is asked to choose between three closed doors. Behind one
door is a car; behind the others, goats. The player picks the first door. Then the host, who
knows what’s behind the doors, opens another door, for example the third door, which has
a goat. The host then asks the contestant, “Do you want to switch to the second door, or
do you want to stay with your original choice?” The question is which is the better strategy,
switching doors or staying?
The correct answer is to switch doors. This question appeared in a column in Parade
magazine in 1990, with the correct answer. Thousands of readers mailed in, including many
with graduate-level mathematical training, to refute the answer and say that there is no
advantage to switching, that staying or switching have the same probability of winning.
Figure 6.19 illustrates the intuition behind why switching is better. Switching doors is the
correct answer because under the standard assumptions, the “switch” strategy has a
probability of two-thirds of winning the car, while the “stay” strategy has only a one-third
probability. It seems counterintuitive because each door has an equal chance of having the
car when the game starts. It seems as if, once the host eliminates one door, each
remaining door should have a 50-50 chance. This logic is false, because the host doesn’t

eliminate a door at random. He only eliminates a door that isn’t the player’s initial selection
and that doesn’t have the car. A third of the times, those are the same door, and two-thirds
of the time they are different doors; that one-third to two-thirds asymmetry is why the
remaining doors don’t each have a 50-50 chance of having the car.
Figure 6.19 The Monty Hall problem. Each door has an equal probability of concealing a prize. The player
chooses a door initially, the host reveals a losing door, and the player has the option to switch their initial
choice. Contrary to intuition, the player should switch; if they switch, they will win two out of three times.
This illustration assumes door 1 is chosen, but the results are the same regardless of the initial choice of
door.
6.3.2 A causal DAG for the Monty Hall problem
Causal modeling makes the Monty Hall problem much more intuitive. We can represent this
game with the causal DAG in figure 6.20.

Figure 6.20 A causal DAG for the Monty Hall problem
The possible outcomes for each variable are as follows:
Door with Car —Indicates the door that has the car behind it. 1st for the first door, 2nd
for the second door, or 3rd for the third door.
Player First Choice —Indicates which door the player chooses first. 1st for the first door,
2nd for the second door, or 3rd for the third door.
Host Inclination —Suppose the host is facing the doors, such that from left to right they
are ordered 1st, 2nd, and 3rd. This Host Inclination variable has two outcomes, Left and
Right. When the outcome is Left, the host is inclined to choose the left-most available
door; otherwise the host will be inclined to choose the right-most available door.
Host Door Selection —The outcomes are again 1st, 2nd, and 3rd.
Strategy —The outcomes are Switch if the strategy is to switch doors from the first
choice, or Stay if the strategy is to stay with the first choice.
Player Second Choice —Indicates which door the player chooses after being asked by
the host whether they want to switch or not. The outcomes again are 1st, 2nd, and 3rd.
Win or Lose —Indicates whether the player wins; the outcomes are Win or Lose.
Winning occurs when Player Second Choice == Door with Car.
Next, we’ll see how to implement this as an SCM in pgmpy.
6.3.3 Implementing Monty Hall as an SCM with pgmpy
The rules of the game give us clear logic for the assignment functions. For example, we can
represent the assignment function for Host Door Selection with table 6.1.

Table 6.1 A lookup table for Host Door Selection, given Player First Choice, Door with Car, and Host
Inclination. It shows which door the host selects, given the player’s first choice, which door has the car, and
the Host Inclination, which refers to whether the host will choose the left-most or right-most door in cases
when the host has two doors to choose from.
Host
Inclination
Left
Right
Door with Car
1st
2nd
3rd
1st
2nd
3rd
Player First
Choice
1st
2nd
3rd
1st
2nd
3rd
1st
2nd
3rd
1st
2nd
3rd
1st
2nd
3rd
1st
2nd
3rd
Host Door
Selection
2nd
3rd
2nd
3rd
1st
1st
2nd
1st
1st
3rd
3rd
2nd
3rd
3rd
1st
2nd
1st
2nd
When the door with the car and the player’s first choice are different doors, the host can
only choose the remaining door. But if the door with the car and the player’s first choice
are the same door, the host has two doors to choose from. He will choose the left-most
door if Host Inclination is Left. For example, if Door with Car and Player First Choice are
both 1st, the host must choose between the 2nd and 3rd doors. He will choose the 2nd door
if Host Inclination == Left and the 3rd if Host Inclination == Right.
This logic would be straightforward to write using if-then logic with a library like Pyro. But
since the rules are simple, we can use the far more constrained pgmpy library to write this
function as a conditional probability table (table 6.2).
Table 6.2 We can convert the Host Door Selection lookup table (table 6.1) to a conditional probability table
that we can implement as a TabularCPD object in pgmpy, where the probability of a given outcome is 0 or 1,
and thus, deterministic.
Host
Inclination
Left
Right
Door with Car
1st
2nd
3rd
1st
2nd
3rd
Player First
Choice
1st
2nd
3rd
1st
2nd
3rd
1st
2nd
3rd
1st
2nd
3rd
1st
2nd
3rd
1st
2nd
3r
Host
Door
Selection
1st
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
2nd
1
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
1
3rd
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
The entries in the table correspond to the probability of the Host Door Selection outcome
given the values of the causes. Each probability outcome is either 0 or 1, given the causal
parents, so the outcome is completely deterministic given the parents. Therefore, we can
use this as our assignment function, and since it is a conditional probability table, we can
implement it using the TabularCPD class in pgmpy.

Listing 6.4 Implementation of Host Door Selection assignment function in pgmpy
from pgmpy.factors.discrete.CPD import TabularCPD
f_host_door_selection = TabularCPD(
    variable='Host Door Selection',    #1
    variable_card=3,     #2
    values=[    #3
        [0,0,0,0,1,1,0,1,1,0,0,0,0,0,1,0,1,0],     #3
        [1,0,1,0,0,0,1,0,0,0,0,1,0,0,0,1,0,1],     #3
        [0,1,0,1,0,0,0,0,0,1,1,0,1,1,0,0,0,0]     #3
    ],     #3
    evidence=[     #4
        'Host Inclination',     #4
        'Door with Car',     #4
        'Player First Choice'     #4
    ],   #4
    evidence_card=[2, 3, 3],    #5
    state_names={    #6
        'Host Door Selection':['1st', '2nd', '3rd'],    #6
        'Host Inclination': ['left', 'right'],   #6
        'Door with Car': ['1st', '2nd', '3rd'],  #6
        'Player First Choice': ['1st', '2nd', '3rd']    #6
    }    #6
)     #6
#1 The name of the variable
#2 The cardinality (number of outcomes)
#3 The probability table. The values match the value in table 6.2, as long as the ordering of the causal
variables in the evidence argument matches the top-down ordering of causal variable names in the table.
#4 The conditioning (causal) variables
#5 The cardinality (number of outcomes) for each conditioning (causal) variable
#6 The state names of each the variables
This code produces f_host_door_selection, a TabularCPD object we can add to a model of the
class BayesianNetwork. We can then use this in a CGM as we would a more typical TabularCPD
object.
Similarly, we can create a look-up table for Player Second Choice, as shown in table 6.3.
Table 6.3 A lookup table for Player Second Choice, conditional on Player First Choice, Host Door Selection,
and Strategy. Player Second Choice cells are empty in the impossible cases where Player First Choice and
Host Door Selection are the same.
Strategy
Stay
Switch
Host Door
Selection
1st
2nd
3rd
1st
2nd
3rd
Player First
Choice
1st
2nd
3rd
1st
2nd
3rd
1st
2nd
3rd
1st
2nd
3rd
1st
2nd
3rd
1st
2nd
3rd
Player Second
Choice
2nd
3rd
1st
3rd
1st
2nd
3rd
2nd
3rd
1st
2nd
1st
The host will never choose the same door as the player’s first choice, so Host Door
Selection and Player First Choice can never have the same value. The entries of Player
Second Choice are not defined in these cases.
Expanding this to a conditional probability table gives us table 6.4. Again, the cells with
impossible outcomes are left blank.

Table 6.4 The result of converting the lookup table for Player Second Choice (table 6.3) to a conditional
probability table that we can implement as a TabularCPD object
Strategy
Stay
Switch
Host Door
Selection
1st
2nd
3rd
1st
2nd
3rd
Player First
Choice
1st
2nd
3rd
1st
2nd
3rd
1st
2nd
3rd
1st
2nd
3rd
1st
2nd
3rd
1st
2nd
3rd
Player
Second
Choice
1st
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
2nd
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
1
0
3rd
0
1
0
1
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
Unfortunately, we can’t leave the impossible values blank when we specify a Tabular-CPD, so
in the following code, we’ll need to assign arbitrary values to these elements.
Listing 6.5 Implementation of Player Second Choice assignment function in pgmpy
from pgmpy.factors.discrete.CPD import TabularCPD
f_second_choice = TabularCPD(
    variable='Player Second Choice',
    variable_card=3,
    values=[
        [1,0,0,1,0,0,1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,1,0,1,0],    #1
        [0,1,0,0,1,0,0,1,0,1,0,1,0,1,0,1,0,1],    #1
        [0,0,1,0,0,1,0,0,1,0,1,0,1,0,0,0,0,0]     #1
    ],
    evidence=[
        'Strategy',
        'Host Door Selection',
        'Player First Choice'
    ],
    evidence_card=[2, 3, 3],
    state_names={
        'Player Second Choice': ['1st', '2nd', '3rd'],
        'Strategy': ['stay', 'switch'],
        'Host Door Selection': ['1st', '2nd', '3rd'],
        'Player First Choice': ['1st', '2nd', '3rd']
    }
)
#1 The probability values are 0 or 1, so the assignment function is deterministic. In cases where the parent
combinations are impossible, we still have to assign a value.
That gives us a second TabularCPD object. We’ll create one for each node.
First, let’s set up the causal DAG.
Listing 6.6 Implementing the full Monty Hall SCM
from pgmpy.models import BayesianNetwork
from pgmpy.factors.discrete.CPD import TabularCPD
monty_hall_model = BayesianNetwork([    #1
    ('Host Inclination', 'Host Door Selection'),     #1
    ('Door with Car', 'Host Door Selection'),     #1
    ('Player First Choice', 'Host Door Selection'),    #1
    ('Player First Choice', 'Player Second Choice'),    #1
    ('Host Door Selection', 'Player Second Choice'),    #1
    ('Strategy', 'Player Second Choice'),    #1
    ('Player Second Choice', 'Win or Lose'),     #1
    ('Door with Car', 'Win or Lose')  #1
])    #1
#1 Build the causal DAG.
monty_hall_model is now a causal DAG. It will become an SCM after we add the exogenous
variable distributions and assignment functions.
The following listing adds the exogenous variable distribution.

Listing 6.7 Create the exogenous variable distributions
p_host_inclination = TabularCPD(       #1
    variable='Host Inclination',    #1
    variable_card=2,   #1
    values=[[.5], [.5]],    #1
    state_names={'Host Inclination': ['left', 'right']}    #1
)    #1
p_door_with_car = TabularCPD(     #2
    variable='Door with Car',    #2
    variable_card=3,    #2
    values=[[1/3], [1/3], [1/3]],    #2
    state_names={'Door with Car': ['1st', '2nd', '3rd']}     #2
)     #2
p_player_first_choice = TabularCPD(     #3
    variable='Player First Choice',     #3
    variable_card=3,     #3
    values=[[1/3], [1/3], [1/3]],     #3
    state_names={'Player First Choice': ['1st', '2nd', '3rd']}     #3
)     #3
p_host_strategy = TabularCPD(    #4
    variable='Strategy',    #4
    variable_card=2,    #4
    values=[[.5], [.5]],     #4
    state_names={'Strategy': ['stay', 'switch']}    #4
)    #4
#1 A CPD for the Host Inclination variable. In cases when the player chooses the door with the car, the host
has a choice between the two other doors. This variable is “left” when the host is inclined to choose the
left-most door, and “right” if the host is inclined to choose the right-most door.
#2 A CPD for the variable representing which door has the prize car. Assume each door has an equal
probability of having the car.
#3 A CPD for the variable representing the player’s first door choice. Each door has an equal probability of
being chosen.
#4 A CPD for the variable representing the player's strategy. “Stay” is the strategy of staying with the first
choice, and “switch” is the strategy of switching doors.
Having created the exogenous distributions, we’ll now create the assignment functions.
We’ve already created f_host_door_selection and f_second_choice, so we’ll add f_win_or_lose—
the assignment function determining whether the player wins or loses.
Listing 6.8 Create the assignment functions
f_win_or_lose = TabularCPD(    
    variable='Win or Lose',    
    variable_card=2,    
    values=[    
        [1,0,0,0,1,0,0,0,1],    
        [0,1,1,1,0,1,1,1,0],    
    ],    
    evidence=['Player Second Choice', 'Door with Car'],    
    evidence_card=[3, 3],    
    state_names={    
        'Win or Lose': ['win', 'lose'],    
        'Player Second Choice': ['1st', '2nd', '3rd'],    
        'Door with Car': ['1st', '2nd', '3rd']    
    }    
)
Finally, we’ll add the exogenous distribution and the assignment functions to
monty_hall_model and create the SCM.
Listing 6.9 Create the SCM for the Monty Hall problem
monty_hall_model.add_cpds(    
    p_host_inclination,    
    p_door_with_car,    
    p_player_first_choice,    
    p_host_strategy,    
    f_host_door_selection,    
    f_second_choice,    
    f_win_or_lose    
)
We can run the variable elimination inference algorithm to verify the results of the
algorithm. Let’s query the probability of winning, given that the player takes the “stay”
strategy.

Listing 6.10 Inferring the winning strategy
from pgmpy.inference import VariableElimination    #1
infer = VariableElimination(monty_hall_model)
q1 = infer.query(['Win or Lose'], evidence={'Strategy': 'stay'})     #2
print(q1)   #2
q2 = infer.query(['Win or Lose'], evidence={'Strategy': 'switch'})     #3
print(q2)   #3
q3 = infer.query(['Strategy'], evidence={'Win or Lose': 'win'})     #4
print(q3)   #4
#1 We’ll use the inference algorithm called “variable elimination.”
#2 Print the probabilities of winning and losing when the player uses the “stay” strategy.
#3 Print the probabilities of winning and losing when the player uses the “switch” strategy.
#4 Print the probabilities that the player used a stay strategy versus a switch strategy, given that the
player won.
This inference produces the following output:
+-------------------+--------------------+
| Win or Lose       |   phi(Win or Lose) |
+===================+====================+
| Win or Lose(win)  |             0.3333 |
+-------------------+--------------------+
| Win or Lose(lose) |             0.6667 |
+-------------------+--------------------+
The probability of winning and losing under the “stay” strategy is 1/3 and 2/3, respectively.
In contrast, here’s the output for the “switch” strategy:
+-------------------+--------------------+
| Win or Lose       |   phi(Win or Lose) |
+===================+====================+
| Win or Lose(win)  |             0.6667 |
+-------------------+--------------------+
| Win or Lose(lose) |             0.3333 |
+-------------------+--------------------+
The probability of winning and losing under the “switch” strategy is 2/3 and 1/3,
respectively. We can also condition on a winning outcome and infer the probability that
each strategy leads to that outcome.
+------------------+-----------------+
| Strategy         |   phi(Strategy) |
+==================+=================+
| Strategy(stay)   |          0.3333 |
+------------------+-----------------+
| Strategy(switch) |          0.6667 |
+------------------+-----------------+
These are plain vanilla non-causal probabilistic inferences—we were just validating that our
SCM is capable of produce these inferences. In chapter 9, we’ll demonstrate how this SCM
enables causal counterfactual inferences that simpler models can’t answer, such as “What
would have happened had the losing player used a different strategy?”
6.3.4 Exogenous variables in the rule-based system
In this Monty Hall SCM, the root nodes (nodes with no incoming edges) in the causal DAG
function as the exogenous variables. This is slightly different from our formal definition of
an SCM, which states that exogenous variables represent causal factors outside the
system. Host Inclination meets that definition, as this was not part of the original
description. Door with Car, Player First Choice, and Strategy are another matter. To remedy
this, we could introduce exogenous parents to these variables, and set these variables
deterministically, given these parents, as we do elsewhere in this chapter. But while
modeling this in pgmpy, that’s a bit redundant.

6.3.5 Applications of SCM-modeling of rule-based systems
While the Monty Hall game is simple, do not underestimate the expressive power of
incorporating rules into assignment functions. Some of the biggest achievements in AI in
previous decades have been at beating expert humans in board games with simple rules.
Simulation software, often based on simple rules for how a system transitions from one
state to another, can model highly complex behavior. Often, we want to apply causal
analysis to rule-based systems engineered by humans (who know and can rewrite those
rules), such as an automated manufacturing system.
6.4 Training an SCM on data
Given a DAG, we make a choice of whether to use a CGM or an SCM. Let’s suppose we want
to go with the SCM, and we want to “fit” or “train” this SCM on data. To do this, we choose
some parameterized function class (e.g., linear functions, logistic functions, etc.) for each
assignment function. That function class becomes a specific function once we’ve fit its
parameters on data. Similarly, for each exogenous variable, we want to specify a canonical
probability distribution, possibly with parameters we can fit on data.
In our femur-height example, all the assignment functions were linear functions and the
exogenous variables were normal distributions. But with tools like Pyro, you can specify
each assignment function and exogenous distribution one by one. Then you can train the
parameters just as you would with a CGM. For example, instead of taking this femur-height
model from the forensic textbook:
ny ~ N (0, 3.3)
y = 25 + 3x + ny
you can just fit the parameters α, β, and δ of a linear model on actual forensic data:
ny ~ N (0, δ)
y = α + βx + ny
In this forensics example, we use a linear assignment function because height is
proportional to femur length. Let’s consider other ways to capture how causes influence
their effects.
6.4.1 What assignment functions should I choose?
The most important choice in an SCM model is your choice of function classes for the
assignment functions, because these choices represent your assumptions about the “how”
of causality. You can use function classes common in math, such as linear models. You can
also use code (complete with if-then statements, loops, recursion, etc.) like we did with the
rock-throwing example.
Remember, you are modeling a ground-truth SCM. You are probably going to specify your
assignment functions differently from those in the ground-truth SCM, but that’s fine. You
don’t need your SCM to match the ground truth exactly; you just need your model to be
right about the “how” assumptions it is relying on for your causal inferences.

SCMS WITHOUT “HOW” ASSUMPTIONS ARE JUST CGMS
Suppose you built an SCM where every assignment function is a linear function. You are
using a linear Gaussian assumption because your library of choice requires it (e.g.,
LinearGaussianCPD is pretty much your only choice for modeling continuous variables in
pgmpy). However, you are not planning on relying on that linear assumption for your
causal inference. In this case, while your model checks the boxes of an SCM, it is
effectively a CGM with linear models of the causal Markov kernels.
Suppose, for example, that instead of a linear relationship between X and Y, X and Y
followed a nonlinear S-curve, and your causal inference was sensitive to this S-curve.
Imagine that the ground-truth SCM captured this with an assignment function in the form of
the Hill equation (a function that arises in biochemistry and that can capture S-curves). But
your SCM instead uses a logistic function fit on data. Your model, though wrong, will be
sufficient to make a good causal inference if your logistic assignment function captured
everything it needed to about the S-curve for your inference to work.
6.4.2 How should I model the exogenous variable distributions?
In section 6.1.3, we formulated our generative SCM in a particular way, where every node
gets its own exogenous variable representing its unmodeled causes. Under that
formulation, the role of the exogenous variable distribution is simply to provide sufficient
variation for the SCM to model the joint distribution. This means that, assuming you have
selected your assignment function classes, you can choose canonical distributions for the
exogenous variables based on how well they would fit the data after parameter estimation.
Some canonical distributions may fit better than others. You can contrast different choices
using standard techniques for model comparison and cross-validation.
These canonical distributions can be parameterized, such as N(0, δ) in
ny ~ N (0, δ)
y = α + βx + ny
A more common approach in generative AI is to use constants in the canonical distribution
and only train the parameters of the assignment function:
ny ~ N(0, 1)
y = α + βx + δ ny
Either is fine, as long as your choice captures your “how” assumptions.
6.4.3 Additive models: A popular choice for SCM modeling
Additive models are SCM templates that use popular trainable function classes for
assignment functions. They can be a great place to start in SCM modeling. We’ll look at
three common types of additive models: linear Gaussian additive model (LiGAM), linear
non-Gaussian additive model (LiNGAM), and the nonlinear additive noise model (ANM).
These models each encapsulate a pair of constraints: one on the structure of the
assignment functions, and one on the distribution of the additive exogenous variables.

Additivity makes this approach easier because there are typically unique solutions to
algorithms that learn the parameters of these additive models from data. In some cases,
those parameters have a direct causal interpretation. There are also myriad software
libraries for training additive models on data.
Let’s demonstrate the usefulness of additive models with an example. Suppose you were a
biochemist studying the synthesis of a certain protein in a biological sample. The sample
has some amount of an enzyme that reacts with some precursors in the sample and
synthesizes the protein you are interested in. You measure the quantity of the protein
you’re interested in. Let X be the amount of enzyme, and let Y be the measured amount of
the protein of interest. We’ll model this system with an SCM, which has the DAG in figure
6.21.
Figure 6.21 The amount of enzyme (X) is a cause the measured quantity of protein (Y).
We have qualitative knowledge of how causes affect effects, but we have to turn that
knowledge into explicit choices of function classes for assignment functions and exogenous
variable distributions. Additive models are a good place to start.
To illustrate, we’ll focus on the assignment function and exogenous variable distribution for
Y, the amount of the target protein in our example. Generating from the exogenous
variable, and setting Y via the assignment function, has the following notation:
ny ~ P(Ny)
y := fy(x, ny)
fy(.) denotes the assignment function for y, which takes a value of the endogenous parent
X and exogenous parent Ny as inputs.
In an additive assignment function, the exogenous variable is always added to some
function of endogenous parents. In our example, this means that the assignment function
for Y has the following form:
y := fy(x, ny) = g(x) + ny
Here, g(.) is some trainable function of the endogenous parent(s), and ny is added to the
results of that function.
For our protein Y, these models say that the measured amount of protein Y is equal to
some function of the enzyme amount g (X  ) plus some exogenous factors, such as noise in
the measurement device. This assumption is attractive, because it lets us think of
unmodeled exogenous causes as additive “noise.” In terms of statistical signal processing,
it is relatively easy to disentangle some core signal (e.g., g (x )) from additive noise.
In general, let V represent an endogenous variable in the model, VPA represent the
endogenous parents of V, and Nv represent an exogenous variable.
v := fv(VPA, nv) = g (VPA) + nv

Additive SCMs have several benefits, but here we’ll focus on their benefit as a template for
building SCMs. We’ll start with the simplest additive model, the linear Gaussian additive
model.
6.4.4 Linear Gaussian additive model
In a linear Gaussian additive model, the assignment functions are linear functions of the
parents, and the exogenous variables have a normal distribution.
In our enzyme example, Ny and Y are given as follows:
ny ~ N(0, σy)
y := β0 + βxx + ny
Here, β0 is an intercept term, and βx is a coefficient for X . We are assuming that for every
unit increase in the amount of enzyme X, there is a βx increase in the expected amount of
the measured protein. Ny accounts for variation around that expected amount due to
exogenous causal factors, and we assume it has a normal distribution with a mean of 0 and
scale parameter σy. For example, we might assume that Ny is composed mostly of
technical noise from the measurement device, such as dust particles that interfere with the
sensors. We might know from experience with this device that this noise has a normal
distribution.
In general, for variable V with a set of K parents, VPA = {Vpa,1, …, Vpa,K}:
This model defines parameters: β0 is an intercept term, βj is the coefficient attached to the
jth parent, and σv is the scale parameter of Nv’s normal distribution.
Let’s see an example of a LiNGAM model in Pyro.
Listing 6.11 Pyro example of a linear Gaussian model
from pyro import sample
from pyro.distributions import Normal
def linear_gaussian():
    n_x = sample("N_x", Normal(9., 3.))
    n_y = sample("N_y", Normal(9., 3.))
    x = 10. + n_x     #1
    y = 2. * x + n_y     #2
    return x, y
#1 The distributions of the exogenous variables are normal (Gaussian).
#2 The functional assignments are linear.
Linear Gaussian SCMs are especially popular in econometric methods used in the social
sciences because the model assumptions have many attractive statistical properties.
Further, in linear models, we can interpret a parent causal regressor variable’s coefficient
as the causal effect (average treatment effect) of that parent on the effect (response)
variable.

6.4.5 Linear non-Gaussian additive models
Linear non-Gaussian additive models (LiNGAM) are useful when the Gaussian assumption
on exogenous variables is not appropriate. In our example, the amount of protein Y cannot
be negative, but that can easily occur in a linear model if β0, x, or nx have low values.
LiNGAM models remedy this by allowing the exogenous variable to have a non-normal
distribution.
Listing 6.12 Pyro example of a LiNGAM model
from pyro import sample
from pyro.distributions import Gamma
def LiNGAM():
    n_x = sample("N_x", Gamma(9., 1.))     #1
    n_y = sample("N_y", Gamma(9., 1.))   #1
    x = 10. + n_x    #2
    y = 2. * x + n_y    #2
    return x, y
#1 Instead of a normal (Gaussian) distribution, the exogenous variables have a gamma distribution with the
same mean and variance.
#2 These are the same assignment functions as in the linear Gaussian model.
In the preceding model, we use a gamma distribution. The lowest possible value in a
gamma distribution is 0, so y cannot be negative.
6.4.6 Nonlinear additive noise models
As I’ve mentioned, the power of the SCM is the ability to choose functional assignments
that reflect how causes affect their direct effects. In our hypothetical example, you are a
biochemist. Could you import knowledge from biochemistry to design the assignment
function? Here is what that reasoning might look like. (You don’t need to understand the
biology or the math, in this example, just the logic).
There is a common mathematical assumption in enzyme modeling called mass action
kinetics. In this model, T is the maximum possible amount of the target protein. The
biochemical reactions happen in real time, and during that time, the amount of the target
protein fluctuates before stabilizing at some equilibrium value Y. Let Y(t) and X(t) be the
amount of the target protein and enzyme at a given time point. Mass action kinetics give
us the following ordinary differential equation:
Here, v and α are rate parameters that characterize the rates at which different
biochemical reactions occur in time. This differential equation has the following equilibrium
solution,
where Y and X are equilibrium values of Y(t) and X(t), and β = v/α.
As an enzyme biologist, you know that this equation captures something of the actual
mechanism underpinning the biochemistry of this system, like physics equations such as
Ohm’s law and SIR models in epidemiology. You elect to use this as your assignment
function for Y:

This is a nonlinear additive noise model (ANM). In general, ANMs have the following
structure:
V = g (Vpa) + Nv
In our example g (X  ) = T × β X / (1 + β X  ). Ny can be normal (Gaussian) or non-Gaussian.
CONNECTING DYNAMIC MODELING AND SIMULATION TO SCMS
Dynamic models describe how a system’s behavior evolves in time. The use of dynamic
modeling, as you saw in the enzyme modeling example, is one approach to addressing
this knowledge elicitation problem for SCMs.
In this section, I illustrated how an enzyme biologist could use a domain-specific dynamic
model, specifically an ODE, to construct an SCM. An ODE is just one type of dynamic
model. Another example is computer simulator models, such as the simulators used in
climate modeling, power-grid modeling, and manufacturing. Simulators can also model
complex social processes, such as financial markets and epidemics. Simulator software is
a growing multibillion dollar market.
In simulators and other dynamic models, specifying the “how” of causality can be easier
than in SCMs. SCMs require assignment functions to explicitly capture the global behavior
of the system. Dynamic models only require you to specify the rules for how things
change from instant to instant. You can then see global behavior by running the
simulation. The trade-off is that dynamic models can be computationally expensive to
run, and it is generally difficult to train parameters of dynamic models on data or perform
inferences given data as evidence. This has motivated interesting research in combining
the knowledge elicitation convenience of dynamic models with the statistical and
computational conveniences of SCMs.
Next, we’ll examine using regression tools to train these additive models.
6.4.7 Training additive model SCMs with regression tools
In statistics, regression modeling finds parameter values that minimize the difference
between a parameterized function of a set of predictors and a response variable.
Regression modeling libraries are ubiquitous, and one advantage of additive SCM models is
that they can use those libraries to fit an SCM’s parameters on data. For example,
parameters of additive models can be fit with standard linear and nonlinear regression
parameter fitting techniques (e.g., generalized least squares). We can also leverage these
tools’ regression goodness-of-fit statistics to evaluate how well the model explains the
data.
Note that the predictors in a general regression model can be anything you like. Most
regression modeling pedagogy encourages you to keep adding predictors that increase
goodness-of-fit (e.g., adjusted R-squared) or reduce predictive error. But in an SCM, your
predictors are limited to direct endogenous causes.

CAN I USE GENERALIZED LINEAR MODELS AS SCMS?
In statistical modeling, a generalized linear model (GLM) is a flexible generalization of
linear regression. In a GLM, the response variable is related to a linear function of the
predictors with a link function. Further, variance of the response variable can be a
function of the predictors. Examples include logistic regression, Poisson regression, and
gamma regression. GLMs are a fundamental statistical toolset for data scientists.
In a CGM (non-SCM), GLMs are good choices as models of causal Markov kernels. But a
common question is whether GLMs can be used as assignment functions in an SCM.
Several GLMs align with the structure of additive SCMs, but it’s generally best not to
think of GLMs as templates for SCMs. The functional form of assignment functions in an
SCM is meant to reflect the nature of the causal relationship between a variable and its
causal parents. The functional form of a GLM applies a (in some cases nonlinear) link
function to a linear function of the predictors. The link function is designed to map that
linear function of the predictors to the mean of a canonical distribution (e.g., normal,
Poisson, gamma). It is not designed to reflect causal assumptions.
6.4.8 Beyond the additive model
If the “how” of an assignment function requires more nuance than you can capture with an
additive model, don’t constrain yourself to an additive model. Using biochemistry as an
example, it is not hard to come up with scenarios where interactions between endogenous
and exogenous causes would motivate a multiplicative model.
For these more complex scenarios, it starts making sense to move toward using
probabilistic deep learning tools to implement an SCM.
6.5 Combining SCMs with deep learning
Let’s revisit the enzyme kinetic model, where the amount of an enzyme X is a cause of the
amount of a target protein Y, as in figure 6.22.
Figure 6.22 The amount of enzyme (X) is a cause of the measured quantity of protein (Y).
I said previously that, based on a dynamic mathematical model popular in the study of
enzyme biology, a good candidate for an additive assignment function for Y is
Further, suppose that we knew from experiments that T was 100 and β was .08.
Ideally, we would want to be able to reproduce these parameter values from data. Better
yet, we should like to leverage the automatic differentiation-based frameworks that power
modern deep learning.

6.5.1 Implementing and training an SCM with basic PyTorch
First, let’s create a PyTorch version of the enzyme model.
Listing 6.13 Implement the PyTorch enzyme model
from torch import nn
class EnzymeModel(nn.Module):    #1
    def __init__(self):
        super().__init__()
        self.β = nn.Parameter(torch.randn(1, 1))     #2
    def forward(self, x):
        x = torch.mul(x, self.β)     #3
        x = x.log().sigmoid()     #4
        x = torch.mul(x, 100.)    #5
        return x
#1 Create the enzyme model.
#2 Initialize the parameter Dዕ.
#3 Calculate the product of enzyme amount X and Dዕ.
#4 Implement the function u / (u + 1) as sigmoid(log(u)), since the sigmoid and log functions are native
PyTorch transforms.
#5 Multiply by T = 100.
Suppose we observed the data from this system, visualized in figure 6.23.
Figure 6.23 Exampled enzyme data. X is the amount of enzyme, and Y is the amount of target protein.

Let’s try to learn β from this data using a basic PyTorch workflow.
Listing 6.14 Fitting enzyme data with PyTorch
import pandas as pd
from torch import tensor
import torch
df = pd.read_csv("https://raw.githubusercontent.com/altdeep
     /causalML/master/datasets/enzyme-data.csv")    #1
X = torch.tensor(df['x'].values).unsqueeze(1).float()     #2
Y = torch.tensor(df['y'].values).unsqueeze(1).float()     #2
def train(X, Y, model, loss_function, optim, num_epochs):     #3
    loss_history = []     #3
    for epoch in range(num_epochs):    #3
        Y_pred = model(X)    #3
        loss = loss_function(Y_pred, Y)     #3
        loss.backward()   #3
        optim.step()    #3
        optim.zero_grad()     #3
        if epoch % 1000 == 0:     #4
            print(round(loss.data.item(), 6))     #4
torch.manual_seed(1)    #5
enzyme_model = EnzymeModel()
optim = torch.optim.Adam(enzyme_model.parameters(), lr=0.00001)     #6
loss_function = nn.MSELoss()     #7
train(X, Y, enzyme_model, loss_function, optim, num_epochs=60000)
#1 Load the enzyme data from GitHub.
#2 Convert the data to tensors.
#3 Create the training algorithm.
#4 Print out losses during training.
#5 Set a random seed for reproducibility.
#6 Initialize an instance of the Adam optimizer. Use a low value for the learning rate because loss is very
sensitive to small changes in Dዕ.
#7 Using mean squared loss error is equivalent to assuming Ny is additive and symmetric.
When I run this code with the given random seed, it produces a value of 0.1079 (you can
access the value by printing enzyme_model.β.data), which only differs slightly from the
ground-truth value of .08. This implementation did not represent the exogenous variable Ny
explicitly, but statistics theory tells us that using the mean squared error loss function is
equivalent to assuming Ny was additive and had a normal distribution. However, it also
assumes that the normal distribution had constant variance, while the funnel shape in the
scatterplot indicates the variance of Ny might increase with the value of X.
6.5.2 Training an SCM with probabilistic PyTorch
The problem with this basic parameter optimization approach is that the SCM should
encode a distribution P (X, Y  ). So we can turn to a probabilistic modeling approach to fit
this model.

Listing 6.15 Bayesian estimation β in a probabilistic enzyme model
import pyro
from pyro.distributions import Beta, Normal, Uniform
from pyro.infer.mcmc import NUTS, MCMC
def g(u):     #1
  return u / (1 + u)  #1
def model(N):     #2
    β = pyro.sample("β", Beta(0.5, 5.0))     #3
    with pyro.plate("data", N):     #4
        x = pyro.sample("X", Uniform(0.0, 101.0))     #5
        y = pyro.sample("Y", Normal(100.0 * g(β * x), x**.5))     #6
    return x, y
conditioned_model = pyro.condition(     #7
    model,    #7
    data={"X": X.squeeze(1), "Y":  Y.squeeze(1)}    #7
)     #7
N = X.shape[0]    #8
pyro.set_rng_seed(526)    #9
nuts_kernel = NUTS(conditioned_model, adapt_step_size=True)    #10
mcmc = MCMC(nuts_kernel, num_samples=1500, warmup_steps=500)   #10
mcmc.run(N)   #10
#1 The simple transform used in the assignment function for Y (amount of target protein)
#2 The probabilistic model
#3 A prior on the parameter β that we mean to fit with this model
#4 A "plate" for the N=100 identical and independently distributed values of X and Y
#5 The marginal probability of the enzyme P(X) is a uniform distribution between 0 and 101.
#6 P(Y|X) is the conditional distribution of Y (protein concentration) given X (and β). I model P(Y|X) with a
normal distribution with both a mean and variance that depends on Y.
#7 Condition the model on the observed evidence.
#8 Get the number of examples in the data (100).
#9 Set a random seed for reproducibility.
#10 To learn β, I use a gradient-based MCMC algorithm called a No-U-Turn Sampler (NUTS). This algorithm is
one of many probabilistic approaches for parameter learning, and this choice is independent of the causal
elements of your model.
The problem with this approach is that it doesn’t have an explicit representation of the
exogenous variables. If we want to use a probabilistic machine learning framework to build
an SCM, we need to make exogenous variables explicit. That is challenging with the
preceding approach for one very nuanced reason: When I write the following statement in
Pyro code, y = pyro.sample("Y", Normal(…, …)), Pyro knows to use that normal distribution to
calculate the probability value (in more precise terms, the likelihood) of each value of Y in
the training data. Those values are used in probabilistic inference algorithms like MCMC.
But if I write a statement that represents an assignment function, like y = f(x, ny), Pyro
doesn’t automatically know how to calculate probability values for Y, especially since as far
as Pyro is concerned, f(.) can be anything.
But there is another problem that is more important than this issue with inference. So far,
we’ve been assuming that we conveniently know a domain-based mathematical functional
form for Y’s assignment function. It would be nice to use deep learning to fit the
assignment functions, but this is problematic.
6.5.3 Neural SCMs and normalizing flows
Suppose we used a neural network to model y = f(x, ny). Indeed for a given SCM, we could
use a multilayer neural network to model each variable, given its parents—call this a
“neural SCM.” The problem is that we want the trainable function class we use for our
assignment functions to represent our assumptions about the “how” of causality. Neural
networks, as universal function approximators, are, by definition, as assumption-free as
curve-fitting functions get. Therefore, to use a neural SCM, we need ways to constrain the
neural assignment function to remain faithful to our “how” assumptions. This could be
done with constraints on the training feature, loss function, and elements of the neural
network architecture. Normalizing flows are an example of the latter.

Returning to the enzyme modeling example, let’s start by enumerating some basic
biological assumptions about the relationships between enzymes and the proteins they
help synthesize:
The process by which the protein leaves the system is independent of the amount of
enzyme. So we expect the amount of target protein to monotonically increase, given
the amount of enzyme.
However, systems tend to saturate, such that there are diminishing returns in adding
more enzyme.
We need a neural network approach that only allows for monotonic functions with
diminishing returns. For this, we’ll use a deep generative modeling approach called
normalizing flows.
Normalizing flows model a complex probability density as an invertible transformation of a
simple base density. I’m going to use flows to model the distribution of endogenous
variables as invertible transformations of exogenous variable distributions. There are many
different transformations, but I’m going to use neural splines.1 Splines are a decades-old
approach to curve-fitting using piece-wise polynomials; a neural spline is the neural
network version of a spline.
Listing 6.16 Initializing splines for assignment functions
from pyro.distributions.transforms import conditional_spline
print(conditional_spline(input_dim=1, context_dim=1))     #1
#1 A neural spline transform is a type of invertible PyTorch neural network module.
We get a three-layer neural network with ReLU activation functions:
ConditionalSpline(
  (nn): DenseNN(
    (layers): ModuleList(
      (0): Linear(in_features=1, out_features=10, bias=True)
      (1): Linear(in_features=10, out_features=10, bias=True)
      (2): Linear(in_features=10, out_features=31, bias=True)
    )
    (f): ReLU()
  )
)
Normalizing flows solve our problem of not having a likelihood value for y = f(x, ny). Like
other probabilistic machine learning models, they allow us to connect an input random
variable (like an exogenous variable) to an output variable (like an endogenous variable)
using layers of transformations. The key difference is that normalizing flow models
automatically calculate the probability values of instances of the output variable in the
data (using the change-of-variable formula from probability theory). That automatic
calculation relies on monotonicity; our causal “how” assumption is that the relationship
between enzyme concentration and protein abundance is monotonic, and normalizing flows
give us monotonicity.
For example, in the following code, NxDist is the distribution of exogenous variable Nx. We
set the distribution as a Uniform(0, 1). f_x is the assignment function for X, implemented as
an AffineTransformation that maps this distribution to Uniform(1, 101).

Listing 6.17 Transforming a distribution of Nx to a distribution of X
from pyro.distributions import TransformedDistribution
from pyro.distributions.transforms import AffineTransform
NxDist = Uniform(torch.zeros(1), torch.ones(1))     #1
f_x = AffineTransform(loc=1., scale=100.0)    #2
XDist = TransformedDistribution(NxDist, [f_x])     #3
#1 The exogenous distribution of X is Uniform(0, 1).
#2 The assignment function for f_x. The AffineTransform multiplies Nx by 100 and adds 1.
#3 XDist is an explicit representation of P(X). Multiplying by 100 and adding 1 gives you a Uniform(1, 101).
So XDist allows us to calculate the probability value of X even when its value is set
deterministically by an assignment function. You can calculate the log-probability value of
50 with XDist.log_prob(torch.tensor([50.0])), which under the Uniform(1, 101) distribution
will be log(1/100).
Let’s first specify the model.
Listing 6.18 Specify the flow-based SCM
import pyro
from pyro.distributions import (
    ConditionalTransformedDistribution,
    Normal, Uniform,
    TransformedDistribution
)
from pyro.distributions.transforms import (
    conditional_spline, spline
)
import torch
from torch.distributions.transforms import AffineTransform
pyro.set_rng_seed(348)
NxDist = Uniform(torch.zeros(1), torch.ones(1))      #1
f_x = AffineTransform(loc=1., scale=100.0)    #2
XDist = TransformedDistribution(NxDist, [f_x])    #3
NyDist = Normal(torch.zeros(1), torch.ones(1))    #4
f_y = conditional_spline(input_dim=1, context_dim=1)    #5
YDist = ConditionalTransformedDistribution(NyDist, [f_y])     #6
#1 The exogenous distribution of X is Uniform(0, 1).
#2 The assignment function for f_x. The AffineTransform multiplies Nx by 100 and adds 1.
#3 XDist is an explicit representation of P(X). Multiplying by 100 and adding 1 gives you a Uniform(1, 101).
#4 The exogenous distribution of Y is Normal(0, 1).
#5 We implement the assignment function for f_y with a neural spline. Optimization will optimize the
parameters of this spline.
#6 YDist is an explicit representation of P(Y|X).
Now we run the training.

Listing 6.19 Train the SCM
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
modules = torch.nn.ModuleList([f_y])     #1
optimizer = torch.optim.Adam(modules.parameters(), lr=3e-3)    #2
losses = []
maxY = max(Y)    #3
Ynorm = Y / maxY    #3
for step in range(800):
    optimizer.zero_grad()     #4
    log_prob_x = XDist.log_prob(X)     #5
    log_prob_y = YDist.condition(X).log_prob(Ynorm)     #6
    loss = -(log_prob_x + log_prob_y).mean()     #7
    loss.backward()    #7
    optimizer.step()   #7
    XDist.clear_cache()
    YDist.clear_cache()
    losses.append(loss.item())
plt.plot(losses[1:])     #8
plt.title("Loss")    #8
plt.xlabel("step")     #8
plt.ylabel("loss")   #8
#1 Register the neural spline functional assignment function for Y.
#2 Initialize the optimizer.
#3 Normalize Y, since the assignment function is working with neural networks.
#4 Set all gradients to 0.
#5 Use P(X) to calculate a log likelihood value for each value of X.
#6 Use P(Y|X) to calculate a log likelihood value for each value of Y, given X.
#7 Fit the parameters of the neural network modules using maximum likelihood as an objective.
#8 Visualize losses during training.
Figure 6.24 shows the training loss over training.

Figure 6.24 Training loss of the flow-based SCM-training procedure
Now we can generate samples from the model and compare them to the training data.

Listing 6.20 Generate from the trained model
x_flow = XDist.sample(torch.Size([100,]))     #1
y_flow = YDist.condition(x_flow).sample(torch.Size([100,])) * maxY   #1
plt.title("""
Observed values of enzyme concentration X\n
and protein concentration Y""")     #2
plt.xlabel('X')     #2
plt.ylabel('Y')    #2
plt.xlim(0, 105)   #2
plt.ylim(0, 120)    #2
plt.scatter(    #2
    X.squeeze(1), Y.squeeze(1), color='firebrick',     #2
    label='Actual Data',    #2
    alpha=0.5     #2
)     #2
plt.scatter(     #2
    x_flow.squeeze(1), y_flow.squeeze(),     #2
    label='Generated values from trained model',     #2
    alpha=0.5     #2
)    #2
plt.legend()     #2
plt.show()     #2
#1 Generate synthetic examples from the trained model.
#2 Visualize the synthetic examples over the examples in the training data to validate model fit.
Figure 6.25 overlays generated samples with the actual examples in the training data.

Figure 6.25 Generated examples from the trained model overlaid upon actual examples in the training data
The ability to have multilayered flows as in other neural network frameworks makes this an
extremely flexible modeling class. But this is not a mere curve-fitting exercise. With the
variational autoencoder example in chapter 5, you saw that you can use neural networks to
map causal parents to their child effects in the general class of CGMs. But that is not
sufficient for SCMs, even if you set endogenous variables deterministically. Again, SCMs
reflect causal assumptions about the “how” of causality in the form of assignment
functions. In this enzyme example, we are asserting that the monotonic relationship
between the enzyme and protein abundance is important in the causal inferences we want
to make, and so we’re constraining the neural nets (and other transforms) in my
assignment functions to those that preserve monotonicity.
Summary
Structural causal models (SCMs) are a type of causal graphical model (CGM) that
encode causal assumptions beyond the assumptions encoded in the causal DAG. The

causal DAG assumptions capture what causes what. The SCM additionally captures how
the causes affect the effects.
SCMs are composed of exogenous variables, probability distributions on those
exogenous variables, endogenous variables, and functional assignments.
Exogenous variables represent unmodeled causes.
Endogenous variables are the variables explicitly included in the model, corresponding
to the nodes we’ve seen in previous causal DAGs.
The functional assignments set each endogenous variable deterministically, given its
causal parents.
The SCM’s additional assumptions represent the “how” of causality in the form of
functional assignments.
SCMs represent a deterministic view of causality, where an outcome is known for
certain if all the causes are known.
You can derive an SCM from a more general (non-SCM) CGM. But given a general CGM,
there are potentially multiple SCMs that entail the same DAG and joint probability
distribution as that CGM.
You can’t learn the functional assignments of an SCM from statistical information in the
data alone.
SCMs are an ideal choice for representing well-defined systems with simple,
deterministic rules, such as games.
Additive noise models provide a useful template for building SCMs from scratch.
Normalizing flows are a useful probabilistic machine learning framework for modeling
SCMs when your causal “how” assumption is monotonicity.
[1] For more information on neural splines, see C. Durkan, A. Bekasov, I. Murray, and G.
Papamakarios, “Neural spline flows,” in Advances in neural information processing
systems, 32 (NeurIPS 2019).

7 Interventions and causal
effects
This chapter covers
Case studies of interventions in machine learning
engineering contexts
How interventions relate to A/B tests and randomized
experiments
Implementing interventions on causal models with
intervention operators
Using a causal model to represent many interventional
distributions
Causal effects as natural extensions of an intervention
distribution
An intervention is something an agent does to cause other
things to happen. Interventions change the data generating
process (DGP).
Interventions are the most fundamental concept in how we
define causality. For example, the concept of intervention,
written in terms of “manipulation” and “varying” a factor, is
central to this definition from an influential 1979 textbook on
experimental design:
The paradigmatic assertion in causal relationships is that
manipulation of a cause will result in the manipulation of
an effect . . . . Causation implies that by varying one
factor I can make another vary. 1

Interventions are how we go from correlation to causality.
Correlation is symmetric; the statements “Amazon’s laptop
sales correlate with Amazon’s laptop bag sales” and
“Amazon’s laptop bag sales correlate with Amazon’s laptop
sales” are equivalent. But interventions make causality a
one-way street: if Amazon recommends the sale of laptops,
laptop bag sales will increase, but if Amazon promotes the
sale of laptop bags, we wouldn’t expect people to respond by
buying new laptops to fill them.
A model must have a way of reasoning about intervention to
be admitted to the club of causal models. Any model that
lets you reason about how interventions change the DGP is,
by definition, a causal model.
You are probably already familiar with interventions in the
form of experiments, such as A/B tests or randomized clinical
trials. Such experiments focus on inferring causal effects. Put
simply, a causal effect is just a comparison of the expected
results of different interventions (e.g., a treatment and a
control, or “A” and “B” in an A/B test).
In this chapter, you’ll learn how to model an intervention and
causal effects even if, indeed especially if, we do not or
cannot do the intervention in real life. We’ll start this chapter
with case studies that motivate modeling interventions. All
the datasets and notebooks for executing them are available
at https://www.altdeep.ai/p/causalaibook.
7.1 Case studies of interventions
A machine learning model can drive decisions to make
“interventions.” Those interventions can, in turn, create
conditions different from those that occurred during model
training. This mismatch in training conditions and
deployment conditions can lead to problems.

7.1.1 Case study: Predicting the weather vs.
business performance
Every day you wake up, look out the window, and guess
whether or not it will rain. Based on that guess, you decide
whether to take an umbrella on your morning walk to work.
Several times you guess and choose incorrectly; you either
take an umbrella and it doesn’t rain, making you look like a
fop, or you don’t take the umbrella, and it rains, making you
look wet. You decide to train a machine learning model that
will take detailed atmospheric readings in the morning and
produce a prediction of whether or not it will rain. By
leveraging machine learning to get more accurate
predictions, you expect fewer mistakes in deciding whether
to bring the umbrella.
You start by collecting daily atmospheric readings as
features, and record whether it rained as labels. After
enough days, you have your first block of training data. Next,
you train the model on that training data and validate its
accuracy on hold-out data. Finally, you deploy the trained
model, meaning that you use it daily to decide whether to
take or leave your umbrella. As you use the deployed model,
you continue to log features and labels daily. Eventually, you
have enough additional data for a second training block, and
you retrain your model to benefit from both blocks of data,
leading to higher accuracy than you had after training on
just the first block. You continue to iteratively train the model
as you collect more blocks of data. Figure 7.1 illustrates the
workflow.

Figure 7.1 Example of a machine learning training workflow where the
sensor data is the features, weather is the label, and bringing an
umbrella is the decision. After each training block, the new data is used
to update the old model, and a new model is deployed. In this case, the
decision does not affect future data.
Now let’s consider a parallel example in business. You are a
data scientist at a company. Instead of atmospheric
readings, you have economic and industry data. Instead of
predicting whether the day will be rainy, you are predicting
whether the quarter will end with low revenues. Instead of
deciding whether to bring an umbrella, you are deciding
whether to advertise. Figure 7.2 illustrates the workflow,
which mirrors the weather example in figure 7.1 exactly;
sunny and rainy days in figure 7.1 map to good and bad
quarters in figure 7.2, and the decision to bring or leave the
umbrella maps to the decision to advertise or not.

Figure 7.2 This is a mirror example of the workflow in figure 7.1.
Business indicators are the features, quarterly performance is the label,
and advertising is the decision. In this case, the decision affects future
data.
Even though the labels and decisions in the two examples
mirror one another, the causal structure of the business
example is fundamentally different; the act of bringing an
umbrella will not affect the weather in future days, but the
act of advertising will affect business in future quarters. As a
result, training block 2 represents a different DGP than
training block 1 because revenue in training block 2 was
affected by advertising. During training, a naive predictive
model might go so far as to associate signs of a lousy
quarter with high revenue, since, in the past, signs of bad
quarters led your company to advertise, which consequently
boosted revenue.
We deploy machine learning models to drive or automate
decisions. Those decisions do not impact the data in domains
like meteorology, geology, and astronomy. But in many, if
not most, domains where we want to use machine learning,
those model-driven decisions are interventions—actions that
change the DGP. That can lead to a mismatch between the
model’s training and deployment conditions, leading to
problems in the model’s reliability.

Another real-world example of this problem occurs in
anomaly detection.
7.1.2 Case study: Credit fraud detection
Anomaly detection seeks to predict when an abnormal event
is occurring. One example is detecting a fraudulent
transaction on a credit card. Credit card companies do
supervised training of predictive models of fraud using
transaction data, where attributes of credit card transactions
(buying patterns, location, cost of the item, etc.) are the
features, and whether the customer later reports the
transaction as fraudulent is the label.
As in the weather and business examples, you train a model
on an initial training block. After training, you can deploy the
algorithm to predict fraud in real time. When a transaction is
initiated, the algorithm is run, and a prediction is generated.
If the algorithm predicts fraud, the transaction is rejected.
While this system is in deployment, a second training set is
being compiled. Some fraud still gets through and is later
reported as fraudulent by the customers. Those transactions
are labeled fraudulent in this new block of data, but the DGP
has changed from the initial training set. The deployed
version 1.0 predictive model is rejecting transactions that it
predicted were fraudulent, but because they were rejected,
you don’t know if they were actual cases of fraud. These
rejected transactions are excluded from the next training set
because they lack labels.
If the model is retrained on the second block, it may develop
a bias toward fraud that slipped past the fraud rejection
system and against the cases of fraud that were rejected.
This bias can become more severe over several iterations.
This process is analogous to a homicide detective who, over

time, does well in solving cases involving uncommon
weapons but poorly in cases involving guns.
The filtering of fraudulent transactions in deployment is an
intervention. In practice, anomaly detection algorithms
address this problem by accounting for interventions in some
way.
7.1.3 Case study: Statistical analysis for an
online role-playing game
Suppose you are a data scientist at an online role-playing
game company. Your leadership wants to know if side-quest
engagement (mini-objectives that are tangential to the
game’s primary objectives) is a driver of in-game purchases
of virtual artifacts. If the answer is yes, the company will
intervene in the game dynamics such that players engage in
more side-quests.
You do an analysis. You query the database and pull records
for a thousand players, the first five of which are shown in
table 7.1. This is observational data (in contrast to
experimental data) because the data is logged observations
of the natural behavior of players as they log in and play.
(The full dataset is available in the notebooks for the
chapter: https://www.altdeep.ai/p/causalaibook.)

Table 7.1 Example rows from observational data on Side-Quest
Engagement and In-Game Purchases
User ID
Side-Quest Engagement
In-Game Purchases
71d44ad5
high
156.77
e6397485
low
34.89
87a5eaf7
high
172.86
c5d78ca4
low
215.74
d3b2a8ed
high
201.07
dc85d847
low
12.93
The standard data science analysis would involve running a
statistical test of the hypothesis that there is a difference
between the In-Game Purchases of players highly engaged in
side-quests and those with low Side-Quest Engagement. The
test calculates the mathematical difference between the
sample means of In-Game Purchases for both groups. In
statistical terms, this difference estimates an effect size. The
test will examine whether this estimated effect size is
significantly different from zero.
SETTING UP YOUR ENVIRONMENT
The code for this chapter was written with Pyro version
1.9.0, pandas version 2.2.1, and pgmpy version 0.1.25.
Using Pyro’s render function to visualize a Pyro model as a
DAG will require Graphviz. Visit
https://www.altdeep.ai/p/causalaibook for a link to a
notebook that contains the code.
We’ll perform this hypothesis test with the pandas library.
First, we’ll pull the data and get the sample means and
standard deviations within each group.

Listing 7.1 Load Side-Quest Engagement vs. In-Game Purchases data
and summarize
import pandas as pd
data_url = (    #1
    "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/altdeep/causalML/master/"     #1
    "datasets/sidequests_and_purchases_obs.csv"    #1
)     #1
df = pd.read_csv(data_url)    #1
summary = df.drop('User ID', axis=1).groupby(     #2
    ["Side-quest Engagement"]     #2
).agg(     #2
    ['count', 'mean', 'std']     #2
)     #2
summary
#1 Load the data from the database query into a pandas DataFrame.
#2 For each level of Side-Quest Engagement (“low”, “high”), calculate
the sample count (number of players), the sample mean In-Game
Purchases amount, and the standard deviation.
This produces the summary in table 7.2.
Table 7.2 Summary statistics from the online game data
Side-Quest Engagement
mean purchases
std
n
low
73.10
75.95
518
high
111.61
55.56
482
This database query pulled 1,000 players, where 482 of
them were highly engaged in side-quests and 518 were not.
The mean In-Game Purchases amount for highly engaged
players is around $112 for high Side-Quest Engagement and
$73 for low Side-Quest Engagement. Generalizing beyond
this data, we conclude that players who are highly engaged
in side-quests spend, on average 112 – 73 = $39 dollars
more than those who aren’t. We can run a two-sample Z-test
to make sure this difference is significant.

Listing 7.2 Test if effect of engagement on In-Game Purchases is
statistically significant
n1, n2 = summary['In-game Purchases']['count']    #1
m1, m2 = summary['In-game Purchases']['mean']   #2
s1, s2 =  summary['In-game Purchases']['std']     #3
pooled_std = (s1**2 / n1 + s2**2 / n2) **.5   #4
z_score = (m1 - m2) / pooled_std    #5
abs(z_score) > 2.   #6
#1 n1 and n2 are the numbers of players in each group (high vs. low
engagement).
#2 m1 and m2 are the group sample means.
#3 s1 and s2 are the group standard deviations.
#4 Estimate the standard error of the difference in mean spending by
pooling (combining) the group standard deviations.
#5 Convert to a z-score, which has a standard norm under the (null)
hypothesis of no difference in spending across engagement levels.
#6 Test if the z-score is more than 2 standard deviations from 0, which
beats a 5% significance threshold.
Running this code shows that the difference in means is
significant. Great, you did some data science that showed
you have a statistically significant effect size: In-Game
Purchases are significantly higher for players who are highly
engaged in side-quests relative to those who are not. Based
on your findings, leadership decides to modify the game
dynamics to draw players into more side-quests. As a result,
In-Game Purchases decline. How could this happen?
7.1.4 From randomized experiments to
interventions
By now you’ve probably recognized that the result from
listing 7.2 is a textbook example of how correlation doesn’t
imply causation. If management wanted to know if
intervening on game dynamics would lead to an increase in
In-Game Purchases, they should have relied on analysis from
a randomized experiment, not simple observational data.
We’ll use the randomized experiment to build more intuition
for a formal model of intervention and see how that
intervention model could simulate a randomized experiment.

7.1.5 From observations to experiments
Suppose that instead of running an observational study, you
run an experiment. Rather than pull data from a SQL query,
you randomly select a set of 1,000 players and randomly
assign them to one of two groups of 500. In one group, the
game dynamics are modified such that Side-Quest
Engagement is artificially fixed at “low,” and in the other
group it is fixed to “high.” We’ll then observe their level of In-
Game Purchases.
This will create experimental data that is the same size and
has roughly the same split between engaged and unengaged
players as the observational data in section 7.1.3. Similarly,
we’ll run the same downstream analysis. This will let us
make an apples-to-apples comparison of using observational
versus experimental data.
Table 7.3 shows examples from the experimental data. You
can find links to the data in
https://www.altdeep.ai/p/causalaibook.
Table 7.3 Example rows from the experimental data evaluating the
effect of Side-Quest Engagement on In-Game Purchases
User ID
Side-Quest Engagement
In-Game Purchases
2828924d
low
224.39
7e7c2452
low
19.89
3ddf2915
low
221.26
10c3d883
high
93.21
c5080957
high
61.82
241c8fcf
high
188.76
Again, we summarize the data with the following code.

Listing 7.3 Load experimental data and summarize
import pandas as pd
exp_data_url = (     #1
    "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/altdeep/causalML/master/"   #1
    "datasets/sidequests_and_purchases_exp.csv"     #1
)    #1
df = pd.read_csv(exp_data_url)     #1
summary = df.drop('User ID', axis=1).groupby(    #2
    ["Side-quest Engagement"]     #2
).agg(     #2
    ['count', 'mean', 'std']    #2
)
print(summary)
#1 Load the experimental data from the database query into a pandas
DataFrame.
#2 For each level of Side-Quest Engagement (“low”, “high”), calculate
the sample count (number of players), the sample mean in-game
purchase amount, and the standard deviation.
Table 7.4 shows the same summary statistics for the
experimental data as table 7.2 does for the observational
data.
Table 7.4 Summary statistics from the online game experimental data
Side-Quest Engagement
mean purchases
std
n
low
92.99
51.67
500
high
131.38
94.84
500
The experiment reflects what happened when the company
intervened to increase Side-Quest Engagement. The sign of
the effect size is negative relative to our first analysis; we
got –38.39, meaning the mean purchases went down $38.39.
When we rerun the test of significance in listing 7.4, we see
the difference is significant for the experimental data, just as
it was for the observational data.

Listing 7.4 Conduct significance test on (experimental) difference in
mean purchases
n1, n2 = summary['In-game Purchases']['count']     #1
m1, m2 = summary['In-game Purchases']['mean']     #2
s1, s2 =  summary['In-game Purchases']['std']    #3
pooled_std = (s1**2 / n1 + s2**2 / n2) **.5    #4
z_score = (m1 - m2) / pooled_std     #5
abs(z_score) > 2.    #6
#1 n1 and n2 are the number of players in each group (high vs low
engagement).
#2 m1 and m2 are the group sample means.
#3 s1 and s2 are the group standard deviations.
#4 Estimate the standard error of the difference in mean spend by
pooling (combining) the group standard deviations.
#5 Convert to a z-score, which has a standard norm under the (null)
hypothesis of no difference in spend across engagement levels.
#6 Tests if the z-score is more than 2 standard deviations from 0, which
beats a 5% significance threshold.
The result shows the difference in group means is again
significant. If you had reported the results of this experiment
instead of the results of the observational study, you would
have correctly concluded that a policy of encouraging higher
Side-Quest Engagement would lead to a drop in average In-
Game Purchases (and you wouldn’t have recommended
doing so).
This experiment had a cost. Many of those 1,000 players who
were included in the experiment would have spent more on
In-Game Purchases had they not been included in the
experiment, and this is especially true for the 500 players
assigned to the high side-quests group. That amounts to lost
revenue that would have been realized had you not run the
experiment. Moreover, the experiment created a suboptimal
gaming experience for players who were assigned a level of
Side-Quest Engagement that was different from their
preferred level. These players are paying the company for a
certain experience, and the experiment degraded that
experience.

The least ideal outcome is reporting based on our simple
two-sample analysis of the observational data; this had no
cost, but it gave the wrong answer. A better outcome is
running the experiment and getting the correct answer,
though this comes at a cost. The ideal outcome is getting the
right answer on the observational data for free. To do that,
we need a causal model.
7.1.6 From experiments to interventions
Let’s see how we can use a causal model to simulate the
results of the experiment from the observational data. First,
let’s assume the causal DAG in figure 7.3.
Figure 7.3 A simple DAG showing the causal relationship between Side-
Quest Engagement and In-Game Purchases. Guild Membership is a
common cause of both.
In our online game, many players are members of guilds.
Guilds are groups of players who pool resources and
coordinate their gameplay, such as working together on side-
quests. Our model assumes that the amount of In-Game
Purchases a player makes also depends on whether they are
in a guild; members of the same guild pool resources, and
many resources are virtual items they must purchase.
Suppose you run a modified version of that initial database
query. The query produces the same exact observational

data seen in table 7.1, except this time it includes an
additional column indicating Guild Membership. Again, we
see six players in table 7.5 (the same six as players shown in
table 7.1).
Table 7.5 The same observational data as in table 7.1, but with a Guild
Membership column
User ID
Side-Quest
Engagement
Guild
Membership
In-Game
Purchases
71d44ad5
high
member
156.77
e6397485
low
nonmember
34.89
87a5eaf7
high
member
172.86
c5d78ca4
low
member
215.74
d3b2a8ed
high
member
201.07
dc85d847
low
nonmember
12.93
We are going to build a causal graphical model on this
observational data using Pyro. To do this, we’ll need to model
the causal Markov kernels: the probability distributions of
Guild Membership, Side-Quest Engagement given Guild
Membership, and In-Game Purchases given Guild
Membership and Side-Quest Engagement. In our Pyro model,
we’ll need to specify some canonical distributions for these
variables and estimate their parameters.
ESTIMATING PARAMETERS AND BUILDING THE MODEL
Pyro can jointly estimate the parameters of each of our
causal Markov kernels just as it could the parameters across
a complex neural network architecture. But it will make our
lives easier to estimate the parameters of each kernel one at
a time using everyday data science analysis, leveraging the
concept of parameter modularity discussed in chapter 2.
Let’s start with Guild Membership.

Listing 7.5 Estimate the probability distribution of Guild Membership
import pandas as pd
full_obs_url = (     #1
    "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/altdeep/causalML/master/"     #1
    "datasets/sidequests_and_purchases_full_obs.csv"    #1
)    #1
df = pd.read_csv(full_obs_url)      #1
membership_counts = df['Guild Membership'].value_counts()    #2
dist_guild_membership = membership_counts / sum(membership_counts)     #2
print(dist_guild_membership)    #2
#1 Load the data from the database query into a pandas DataFrame.
#2 Calculate the proportions of members vs. nonmembers.
This prints out the following result:
nonmember    0.515
member       0.485
Name: Guild Membership, dtype: float64
These are the proportions of guild members vs. nonmembers
in the data. We can use these as estimates of the probability
that a player is a member or a nonmember. If we took these
proportions as is, they would be maximum likelihood
estimates of the probabilities, but for simplicity, we’ll just put
it at 50/50 (the probability of being a member is .5).
Next, we’ll do the same for the conditional probability
distribution (CPD) of Side-Quest Engagement level given
Guild Membership.

Listing 7.6 Estimate the CPD of Side-Quest Engagement given Guild
Membership
member_subset = df[(df['Guild Membership'] == 'member')]     #1
member_engagement_counts = (   #1
    member_subset['Side-quest Engagement'].value_counts()   #1
)    #1
dist_engagement_member = (    #1
    member_engagement_counts / sum(member_engagement_counts)   #1
)    #1
print(dist_engagement_member)    #1
nonmember_subset = df[(df['Guild Membership'] == 'nonmember')]    #2
nonmember_engagement_counts = (   #2
    nonmember_subset['Side-quest Engagement'].value_counts()    #2
)     #2
dist_engagement_nonmember = (    #2
    nonmember_engagement_counts /   #2
sum(nonmember_engagement_counts)    #2
)     #2
print(dist_engagement_nonmember)     #2
#1 Calculate the probability distribution of Side-Quest Engagement
level (“high” vs. “low”) given that a player is a member of a guild.
#2 Calculate the probability distribution of Side-Quest Engagement
level (“high” vs. “low”) given that a player is not a member of a guild.
Listing 7.6 prints the following output proportions of Side-
Quest Engagement levels for guild members:
high    0.797938
low     0.202062
The following proportions are for non-guild-members:
high    0.184466
low     0.815534
Again, we’ll round these results. Guild members have an
80% chance of being highly engaged in side-quests, while
nonmembers have only a 20% chance of being highly
engaged.
Finally, for each combination of Guild Membership and Side-
Quest Engagement, we’ll calculate the sample mean and
standard deviation of In-Game Purchases. We’ll use these
sample statistics as estimates for mean and location
parameters in a canonical distribution when we code the

causal Markov kernel for In-Game Purchases in the causal
model.
Listing 7.7 Calculate purchase stats across levels of engagement and
Guild Membership
purchase_dist_nonmember_low_engagement = df[     #1
    (df['Guild Membership'] == 'nonmember') &    #1
    (df['Side-quest Engagement'] == 'low')    #1
].drop(     #1
  ['User ID', 'Side-quest Engagement', 'Guild Membership'], axis=1   #1  
).agg(['mean', 'std'])    #1
print(round(purchase_dist_nonmember_low_engagement, 2))    #1
purchase_dist_nonmember_high_engagement = df[     #2
    (df['Guild Membership'] == 'nonmember') &    #2
    (df['Side-quest Engagement'] == 'high')    #2
].drop(     #2
  ['User ID', 'Side-quest Engagement', 'Guild Membership'], axis=1     #2
).agg(['mean', 'std'])    #2
print(round(purchase_dist_nonmember_high_engagement, 2))    #2
purchase_dist_member_low_engagement = df[     #3
    (df['Guild Membership'] == 'member') &    #3
    (df['Side-quest Engagement'] == 'low')    #3
].drop(     #3
  ['User ID', 'Side-quest Engagement', 'Guild Membership'], axis=1     #3
).agg(['mean', 'std'])     #3
print(round(purchase_dist_member_low_engagement, 2))     #3
purchase_dist_member_high_engagement = df[     #4
    (df['Guild Membership'] == 'member') &    #4
    (df['Side-quest Engagement'] == 'high')    #4
].drop(    #4
  ['User ID', 'Side-quest Engagement', 'Guild Membership'], axis=1    #4
).agg(['mean', 'std'])     #4
print(round(purchase_dist_member_high_engagement, 2))   #4
#1 Estimate the sample mean and standard deviation of In-Game
Purchases for non-guild-members with low Side-Quest Engagement.
#2 Estimate the sample mean and standard deviation of In-Game
Purchases for non-guild-members with high Side-Quest Engagement.
#3 Estimate the sample mean and standard deviation of In-Game
Purchases for guild members with low Side-Quest Engagement.
#4 Estimate the sample mean and standard deviation of In-Game
Purchases for guild members with high Side-Quest Engagement.
For non-guild-members with low Side-Quest Engagement, we
have these results:
      In-game Purchases
mean              37.95
std               23.80

For non-guild-members with high Side-Quest Engagement,
we have
      In-game Purchases
mean              54.92
std                4.92
For guild members with low Side-Quest Engagement, we
have
      In-game Purchases
mean             223.71
std                5.30
For guild members with high Side-Quest Engagement, we
have
      In-game Purchases
mean             125.53
std               53.44
Finally, in listing 7.8, we use these various statistics as
parameter estimates in a causal graphical model built in
Pyro.

Listing 7.8 Building a causal model of In-Game Purchases in Pyro
import pyro
from torch import tensor
from pyro.distributions import Bernoulli, Normal
def model():
    p_member = tensor(0.5)    #1
    is_guild_member = pyro.sample(    #1
        "Guild Membership",     #1
        Bernoulli(p_member)     #1
    )     #1
    p_engaged = (tensor(0.8)*is_guild_member +    #2
                 tensor(.2)*(1-is_guild_member))    #2
    is_highly_engaged = pyro.sample(    #2
        "Side-quest Engagement",     #2
        Bernoulli(p_engaged)     #2
    )     #2
    get_purchase_param = lambda param1, param2, param3, param4: (     #3
        param1 * (1-is_guild_member) * (1-is_highly_engaged) +     #3
        param2 * (1-is_guild_member) * (is_highly_engaged) +   #3
        param3 * (is_guild_member)   * (1-is_highly_engaged) +    #3
        param4 * (is_guild_member)   * (is_highly_engaged)     #3
    )     #3
    μ = get_purchase_param(37.95, 54.92, 223.71, 125.50)     #4
    σ = get_purchase_param(23.80, 4.92, 5.30, 53.49)    #4
    in_game_purchases = pyro.sample(    #4
        "In-game Purchases",   #4
        Normal(μ, σ)     #4
    )   #4
    guild_membership = "member" if is_guild_member else "nonmember"     #5
    engagement = "high" if is_highly_engaged else "low"   #5
    in_game_purchases = float(in_game_purchases)     #5
    return guild_membership, engagement, in_game_purchases     #5
#1 Probability of being a guild member vs. a nonmember is .5. Using
this probability, we generate a Guild Membership value (1 for member, 0
for nonmember) from a Bernoulli distribution.
#2 We generate a value for Side-Quest Engagement from a Bernoulli
distribution (1 for high, 0 for low) with a parameter that depends on
Guild Membership.
#3 Helper function for calculating parameters for In-Game Purchases
#4 We specify the location parameter of a normal distribution on In-
Game Purchases using the sample means we found in the observational
data.
#5 As with the mean parameters, we specify the scale parameters for a
canonical distribution on In-Game Purchases using the standard
deviations we found in the data.
To confirm that the Pyro model encodes a causal DAG, we
can run pyro.render_ model(model), which produces figure 7.4.

Figure 7.4 Result of calling pyro.render_model with the causal model

LEVERAGING THE PARAMETRIC FLEXIBILITY OF PROBABILISTIC
PROGRAMMING
Note the flexibility of our choices for modeling the
variables in the Pyro model. For example, in modeling the
distribution of In-Game Purchases, we used the normal
distribution, but we could have used other distributions.
For example, In-Game Purchases cannot be a negative
number, so we could have selected a canonical distribution
that is only defined for positive numbers, rather than a
normal distribution, which is defined for negative and
positive numbers. This would be especially useful for non-
guild-members with low Side-Quest Engagement, because
generation from a normal distribution with a mean of 37.95
and a scale parameter of 23.80 will have about a 5.5%
chance of generating a negative value. However, we’re
choosing to be a bit lazy and use the normal distribution in
this case, since a few negative numbers for In-Game
Purchases won’t have much impact on the results of our
analysis.
The point is that probabilistic programming tools like Pyro
provide us with parametric flexibility, unlike tools like
pgmpy. It is good practice to leverage that flexibility to
reflect your assumptions about the DGP.
PYRO’S INTERVENTION ABSTRACTION
Pyro has an abstraction for representing an intervention in
pyro.do. It takes a model and returns a new model that
reflects the intervention. Listing 7.9 shows how we can use
pyro.do to change the previous model into one that reflects
an intervention that sets Side-Quest Engagement to “high”
and to “low.”

Listing 7.9 Representing interventions with pyro.do
int_engaged_model = pyro.do(    #1
    model,    #1
    {"Side-quest Engagement": tensor(1.)}   #1
)    #1
int_unengaged_model = pyro.do(     #2
    model,    #2
    {"Side-quest Engagement": tensor(0.)}     #2
)    #2
#1 An intervention that sets Side-Quest Engagement to 1.0 (i.e.,
“high”). This returns a new model.
#2 An intervention that sets Side-Quest Engagement to 0.0 (i.e., “low”).
This returns a new model.
Now we have two new models: one with an intervention that
sets Side-Quest Engagement to “high” and one that sets it to
“low.” If our original model is correct, generating 500
examples from each of these new intervened-upon models,
and combining them into 1000 examples, effectively
simulates the experiment. Remember, we estimated the
parameters of this causal model using only the observational
data illustrated in table 7.4. If we can train a model on
observational data and use it to accurately simulate the
results of an experiment, that saves us from actually having
to run the experiment.
Listing 7.10 uses int_engaged_model and int_unengaged_model to
simulate experimental data. We can confirm that the
simulation was effective by comparing the summary
statistics of this simulated data to the summary statistics of
the actual experimental data.

Listing 7.10 Simulating experimental data with pyro.do interventions
pyro.util.set_rng_seed(123)    #1
simulated_experimental_data = [    #2
    int_engaged_model() for _ in range(500)    #2
] + [     #2
    int_unengaged_model() for _ in range(500)     #2
]    #2
simulated_experimental_data = pd.DataFrame(    #2
    simulated_experimental_data,    #2
    columns=[    #2
        "Guild Membership",    #2
        "Side-quest Engagement",    #2
        "In-Game Purchases"    #2
    ]    #2
)     #2
sim_exp_df = simulated_experimental_data.drop(     #3
    "Guild Membership", axis=1)    #3
summary = sim_exp_df.groupby(     #4
        ["Side-quest Engagement"]    #4
    ).agg(    #4
        ['count', 'mean', 'std']     #4
    )     #4
print(summary)    #4
#1 Set a random seed for reproducibility.
#2 Simulate 500 rows from each intervention model, and combine them
to create simulated experimental data.
#3 The simulated data will include a Guild Membership column. We can
drop it to get simulated data that looks like the original experiment.
#4 Recreate the statistical summaries of In-Game Purchases for each
level of engagement.
This code simulates the experiment, providing the
summaries in table 7.6. Again, these are sample statistics
from a simulated experiment we created by first estimating
some parameters on observational data, second, building a
causal generative model with those parameters, and third,
using pyro.do to simulate the results of an intervention.
Contrast these with the statistics in table 7.7 that we
obtained from the actual experimental data.
Table 7.6 Summary statistics from the simulated experiment
Side-Quest Engagement
count
mean
std
high
500
89.897309
52.696709
low
500
130.674021
93.921543

Table 7.7 Summary statistics from the actual experiment
Side-Quest Engagement
count
mean
std
high
500
92.99054
51.673631
low
500
131.38228
94.840705
The two sets of summaries are similar enough that we can
say that we’ve successfully replicated the experimental
results from the observational data.
7.1.7 Recap
Let’s recap. A causal DAG combined with a Pyro abstraction
for an intervention allowed us to do an analysis on an
observational dataset that produced the same results as an
analysis on an experimental dataset. Had you run this
analysis on the initial observational data instead of the
simple two-sample statistical test, you would have provided
the correct answer to leadership, and they would not have
changed the dynamics to increase Side-Quest Engagement.
Note that this wasn’t a free lunch. This analysis required
causal assumptions in the form of a causal DAG. Errors in
specifying the causal DAG can lead to errors in the output of
the analysis. But assuming your causal DAG was correct (or
close enough), it would have saved you the actual costs and
opportunity costs of running that experiment.
So how exactly does pyro.do work? How does it modify the
model to represent an intervention? We’ll answer these
questions with the ideas of ideal interventions and
intervention operators.

7.2 The ideal intervention and
intervention operator
To understand how our simulated experiment worked, we
need a concrete definition of intervention. We’ll use a
specific definition, called the ideal intervention, and also
known as the atomic intervention, structural intervention,
surgical intervention, and independent intervention.
The definition of an ideal intervention breaks down into three
parts:
The ideal intervention targets a specific variable or set of
variables in the DGP.
The operation sets those variables to a fixed value.
By setting the variable to a fixed value, the intervention
blocks the influence from the target’s causes, such that
the target is now statistically independent of its causes.
We’ll use the notation do(X = x) to represent an ideal
intervention that sets X to x. Note that we can have
interventions on sets of variables, as in do(X = x, Y = y, Z = 
z).
7.2.1 Intervention operators
A causal model represents relationships in the DGP. The
preceding definition of the ideal intervention describes how it
changes the DGP. Now it remains to us to define how our
causal models will reflect that change.
An intervention operator is some way of changing our causal
model to reflect an intervention. One of the first tasks of
creating any novel computational representation of causality

is to define an intervention operator for the ideal
intervention.
Intervention operators can implement ideal interventions,
stochastic interventions (discussed in section 7.5), and other
types of interventions. Unless I indicate otherwise, you can
assume that “intervention operator” means “intervention
operator for ideal interventions.”
Fortunately, structural causal models and general causal
graphical models have well-defined intervention operators.
We’ll explore those, as well as look at intervention operators
designed for causal programs like pyro.do.
7.2.2 Ideal interventions in structural causal
models
We’ll start with the structural causal model. Let M represent
a structural causal model of the online game. We’d write M
as follows:
fG, fE, and fI are the assignment functions for G (Guild
Membership), E (Side-Quest Engagement ), and I (In-Game
Purchases ), respectively.
An ideal intervention do(E=“high”) transforms the model as
follows:

The intervention operator for the SCM replaces the
intervention target E’s assignment function with the
intervention value “high.”
Suppose you have an SCM with a variable (or set of
variables) X. You want to apply an intervention do(X = x). The
intervention operator replaces the intervention target’s
assignment function with the intervention value.
Consider how this meets the three elements of our definition
of an ideal intervention:
The intervention do(X = x) only directly affects the
assignment function for X. No other assignment function
is affected.
The intervention explicitly sets X to a specific value.
Since the value of X is set to a constant, it no longer
depends on its direct causal parents.
7.2.3 Graph surgery: The ideal intervention in
causal DAGs and causal graphical models
Now we’ll consider how to think graphically about the ideal
intervention. First, let’s reexamine the online game’s causal
DAG in figure 7.5.
Figure 7.5 The causal DAG for the online game

According to our graph, Guild Membership is the causal
parent of Side-Quest Engagement. That parent-child
relationship determines a causal Markov kernel—the
conditional probability distribution of Side-Quest
Engagement, given Guild Membership. Recall our model of
this causal Markov kernel, shown in table 7.8.
Table 7.8 Conditional probability table for causal Markov kernel of Side-
Quest Engagement
Guild Membership
nonmember
member
Side-Quest Engagement
low
.8
.2
high
.2
.8
Imagine the mechanics of our experiment. Players log on,
and the digital experimentation platform selects some
players for participation in the experiment. Some of those
players are guild members, and some are not.
Consider a player named Jojo, who is not a guild member,
who is logging on. Given this information only, he will have a
20% chance of engaging highly in side-quests during this
session of gameplay, according to our model.
But the experimentation platform selects him for the
experiment. It randomly assigns him to the high Side-Quest
Engagement group. Once he is in that group, what is the
probability that Jojo will engage highly in side-quests? The
answer is 100%. In experimental terms, what is the
probability that someone assigned to the treatment group
will be exposed to the treatment? 100%. For data scientists
familiar with the jargon of A/B testing, what is the probability
that someone assigned to group A will be exposed to variant
A? 100%.

Indeed, supposing instead of Jojo, the subject was Ngozi, who
is a guild member. While originally Ngozi had an 80% chance
of being highly engaged in side-quests, upon being assigned
to the high Side-Quest Engagement group in the experiment,
she changes to having a 100% chance of being highly
engaged.
We need to rewrite our conditional probability distribution of
Side-Quest Engagement to reflect these new probabilities, as
in table 7.9.
Table 7.9 Rewriting the conditional probability table of Side-Quest
Engagement to reflect the certainty of engagement level upon being
assigned to the high-engagement group in the experiment
Guild Membership
nonmember
member
Side-Quest Engagement
low
0.0
0.0
high
1.0
1.0
Now we see that this modified distribution of Side-Quest
Engagement is the same regardless of Guild Membership.
That is the definition of probabilistic independence, so we
should simplify this conditional probability table to reflect
that; we can reduce table 7.9 to table 7.10.
Table 7.10 Rewriting the conditional probability table of Side-Quest
Engagement to reflect the fact that engagement level no longer
depends on Guild Membership
Side-Quest Engagement
low
0.0
high
1.0
When we simplify the distribution in this way, we have to
recall that this is a model of a causal Markov kernel, which is
defined by the graph. Our initial graph says Side-Quest
Engagement is caused by Guild Membership. But it seems

that after the experiment randomly allocates players either
to the high engagement or low engagement group, that
causal dependency is broken; a player’s engagement level is
solely determined by the group they are assigned to.
We need an intervention operator that changes our causal
graph to reflect this broken causal dependency. This
intervention operator is called graph surgery (also known as
graph mutlitation), and it’s illustrated in figure 7.6.
Figure 7.6 Graph surgery removes an incoming edge to the intervention
target Side-Quest Engagement.
While Guild Membership is a cause of Side-Quest
Engagement in normal settings, the experiment’s
intervention on Side-Quest Engagement broke that variable’s
causal dependence on Guild Membership. Since that causal
dependence is gone, graph surgery changes the graph to
one where the edge from Guild Membership to Side-Quest
Engagement is snipped.
In general, suppose you have a causal graph with node X.
You want to apply an intervention do(X = x). Then you
represent that intervention on the causal DAG by “surgery”
removing all incoming edges to X. Graph surgery is available
in libraries such as pgmpy. For example, here is how we

would use pgmpy to apply graph surgery to the online
gaming DAG.
Listing 7.11 Graph surgery on a DAG in pgmpy
from pgmpy.base import DAG
G = DAG([     #1
    ('Guild Membership', 'Side-quest Engagement'),     #1
    ('Side-quest Engagement', 'In-game Purchases'),     #1
    ('Guild Membership', 'In-game Purchases')    #1
])     #1
G_int = G.do('Side-quest Engagement')    #2
#1 Build the causal DAG.
#2 The do method in the DAG class applies graph surgery.
We can now plot both the original DAG and the transformed
DAG and compare them.
Listing 7.12 Plot the transformed DAG
import pylab as plt
import networkx as nx
pos = {     #1
    'Guild Membership': [0.0, 1.0],     #1
    'Side-quest Engagement': [-1.0, 0.0],     #1
    'In-game Purchases': [1.0, -0.5]     #1
}     #1
ax = plt.subplot()     #2
ax.margins(0.3)    #2
nx.draw(G, ax=ax, pos=pos, node_size=3000,    #2
        node_color='w', with_labels=True)   #2
plt.show()    #2
ax = plt.subplot()     #3
ax.margins(0.3)     #3
nx.draw(G_int, ax=ax, pos=pos,    #3
        node_size=3000, node_color='w', with_labels=True)     #3
plt.show()     #3
#1 Create a dictionary of node positions that we can use to visualize
both graphs.
#2 Visualize the original graph.
#3 Visualize the transformed graph.
These visualizations produce the same DAG as in figure 7.6.
Next, we’ll look at the effect of graph surgery on d-
separation and its implications for conditional independence.

7.2.4 Graph surgery and d-separation
Consider how graph surgery affects reasoning with d-
separation, as in figure 7.7. Initially, we have two d-
connecting paths between Side-Quest Engagement and In-
Game Purchases: one path was the direct cause path, and
the other was through the common cause of Guild
Membership. After graph surgery, only the direct causal path
remains.
Figure 7.7 In the original DAG on the left, there are two d-connected
paths between Side-Quest Engagement and In-Game Purchases. These
paths equate to two sources of statistical dependence between the two
variables. After graph surgery, only the causal path remains, reflecting
causal dependence.
Recall that each d-connected path between two variables is
a source of statistical dependence between those variables.
When we represent an intervention with graph surgery that
removes incoming edges to the intervention target(s), we
remove any paths to other nodes that go through that
variable’s causes. Only outgoing paths to other nodes
remain. As a result, the remaining paths from that variable
reflect dependence due to that variable’s causal influence on
other variables. The ideal intervention removes the causal
influence the target variable receives from its direct parents.

Thus, it removes any dependence on other variables that
flows through those parents.
7.2.5 Ideal interventions and causal Markov
kernels
Graph surgery on the causal DAG removes the incoming
edges to the target node(s). However, for a causal graphical
model, we need an intervention operator that changes the
graph and goes one step farther to rewrite the causal Markov
kernel of the intervention target, as we did when we
collapsed table 7.9 into table 7.10.
Initially, our online gaming model has causal Markov kernels
{P (G ), P (E |G ), and P (I |E, G )}. In table 7.9 we saw the
conditional probability table representation of P (E |G ) and
how an intervention reduced it to table 7.10, where 100% of
the probability is placed on the outcome “high.”
Generally, the intervention operator for causal graphical
models replaces the causal Markov kernel(s) of the
intervention target(s) with a degenerate distribution,
meaning a distribution that puts 100% of the probability on
one value, namely the intervention value.
When we combine graph surgery with this replacement of
the target node’s causal Markov kernel with a degenerate
distribution, we have an intervention operator on a causal
graphical model that meets the three elements of the
definition of ideal intervention:
You only remove incoming edges for the nodes targeted
by the intervention.
100% of the probability is assigned to a fixed value.
Removing the incoming edges to the intervention target
means that the variable is no longer causally dependent

on its parents.
In listing 7.11, graph surgery is implemented in the do
method in the DAG class. The BayesianNetwork class, our default
for building causal graphical models, also has a do method.
Like the DAG method, it takes an intervention target. At the
time of writing, the method does not take an intervention
value and thus does not satisfy the second element of the
definition of ideal intervention.
pgmpy uses objects from subclasses of the BaseFactor class
(e.g., the TabularCPD class) to represent causal Markov
kernels. The do method in the BayesianNetwork class first does
graph surgery and then replaces the factor object
representing the intervention target’s causal Markov kernel.
However, that replacement factor object is not degenerate; it
does not assign all the probability value to one outcome.
Rather, it returns an object representing the probability
distribution of the target variable after marginalizing over its
parents in the original unmodified graph. Technically, this is
an intervention operator for a stochastic intervention, which
I’ll discuss in section 7.5. To build an intervention operator
for the ideal intervention, you need to write additional code
to modify the factor to assign all probability to the
intervention value.
7.2.6 Ideal interventions in a causal program
Recall that in listing 7.10 we simulated an experiment where
players were assigned to high-engagement and low-
engagement groups using the pyro.do operator. Specifically,
we called pyro.do as in following listing.

Listing 7.13 Revisiting pyro.do
int_engaged_model = pyro.do(     #1
    model,    #1
    {"Side-quest Engagement": tensor(1.)}    #1
)    #1
int_unengaged_model = pyro.do(     #2
    model,     #2
    {"Side-quest Engagement": tensor(0.)}     #2
)     #2
#1 An intervention that sets Side-Quest Engagement to 1.0 (i.e.,
“high”). This returns a new model.
#2 An intervention that sets Side-Quest Engagement to 0.0 (i.e., “low”).
This returns a new model.
What exactly does pyro.do do? pyro.do is Pyro’s intervention
operator. We saw, by using pyro.render_model to generate
figure 7.4, that our online gaming model in Pyro has an
underlying causal DAG, and therefore is a causal graphical
model.
But a deep probabilistic machine learning framework like
Pyro allows you to do things that we can’t easily represent
with a causal DAG, such as recursion, conditional control
flow, or having a random number of variables not realized
until runtime. As an intervention operator, pyro.do must work
in these cases as well.
The intervention operator in Pyro works by finding calls to
pyro.sample, and replacing those calls with an assignment to
the intervention value. For example, the online game model
had the following line:
is_highly_engaged = pyro.sample("Side-quest Engagement", Bernoulli(p_engaged))
This pyro.sample call generates a value for Side-Quest
Engagement. pyro.do(model, {"Side-quest Engagement":
tensor(1.)}) essentially replaces that line with this:
is_highly_engaged = tensor(1.)

(I say “essentially” because pyro.do does a few other things
too, which I’ll discuss in chapter 10).
This replacement is much like the replacement of the
assignment function in the SCM, or a causal Markov kernel
with a degenerate kernel in a causal graphical model. As an
intervention operator, it meets the criteria for an ideal
intervention. It targets a specific variable, and it assigns it a
specific value. It eliminates its dependence on its causes by
removing flow dependence (dependence on results of
executing preceding statements in the program).
Using a flexible deep probabilistic machine learning tool like
Pyro to build a causal model allows you to construct causal
representations beyond DAGs and simple ideal interventions.
Doing so puts you in underdeveloped territory in terms of
theoretical grounding, but it could lead to interesting new
applications.
In the next section, we’ll consider how interventions affect
probability distributions.
7.3 Intervention variables and
distributions
An ideal intervention fixes the random variable it targets,
essentially turning it into a constant. But the intervention
indirectly affects all the random variables causally
downstream of the target variable. As a result, their
probability distributions (joint, conditional, or marginal)
change from what they were.
7.3.1 “Do” and counterfactual notation
Causal modeling uses special notation to help reason about
how interventions affect random variables and their

distributions. One common approach is to use the “do”-
notation. Using our online game as an example, P(I) is the
probability distribution of In-Game Purchases across all
players, P(I|E=“high”) is the probability distribution of In-
Game Purchases given players with “high” engagement, and
P(I|do(E= “high”)) is the probability distribution of In-Game
Purchases given an intervention that sets a player’s
engagement level to “high.” The second column of table
7.11 illustrates extensions of this notation to joint
distributions, multiple interventions, and mixing
interventions with observations.
Table 7.11 Examples of do-notation and counterfactual notation
Literal
Do-notation
Counterfactual
notation
The probability distribution of In-
Game Purchases across all
players
P(I )
P(I )
The probability distribution of In-
Game Purchases for players with
“high” engagement
P(I |E=“high”)
P(I |E=“high”)
The probability distribution of In-
Game Purchases when a
player’s engagement level is set
(by intervention) to “high”
P(I |do(E= “high”))
P(I E= “high”)
The joint probability distribution
of In-Game Purchases and Guild
Membership when engagement
is set to “high”
P(I, G|do(E=“high”))
P(I E=“high”,
GE=“high”)
The probability distribution of In-
Game Purchases when
engagement is set to “high” and
membership is set to
“nonmember”
P(I |do(E =“high”,
G=“nonmember”))
P(I E= “high”,
G=“nonmember”)
The probability distribution of In-
Game Purchases for guild
members when engagement is
set to “high”
P(I |do(E =“high”), G 
= “member”)
P(IE =“high”|G 
= “member”)

An alternative is to use counterfactual notation, which uses
subscripts to represent a new version of a variable after the
system has been exposed to intervention. For example, if I is
a variable that represents In-Game Purchases, IE=“high”
represents In-Game Purchases under an intervention that
sets Side-Quest Engagement to “high.” If P(I  ) is the
probability distribution of In-Game Purchases, then
P(IE=“high”) is the probability distribution. Again, table 7.11
contrasts do-notation with counterfactual notation in the
third column. Going forward, I’ll mostly use counterfactual
notation.

FROM CAUSAL LANGUAGE TO SYMBOLS
In many cases in statistics and machine learning, notation
only serves to add formalism and rigor to something just
as easily explained in plain language. However, notation is
important in causality, because it makes a clear distinction
between when we are talking about something causal and
when we are not. It is important because making the
distinction is harder in plain English. For example, consider
the following two questions:
“What would In-Game Purchases be for a player who was
highly engaged in side-quests?”
“What would In-Game Purchases be if a player was highly
engaged in side-quests?”
Is it obvious to you that the first question corresponds to
P(I|E=“high”) and the second to P(IE=“high”)? The first
question corresponds to a subset of players who are highly
engaged. The traditional conditional probability notation is
fine when we want to zoom in on a subset of a distribution
or population. The second question asks what if someone
were highly engaged. In the next chapter, we’ll see that
“what if” hypothetical questions imply an intervention. But
because of the ambiguity of language, someone could ask
one question while really meaning the other. The notation
gives us an unambiguous way of constructing our causal
queries.
Again, in chapter 8, we’ll investigate more examples of
mapping language to counterfactual notation.

7.3.2 When causal notation reduces to
traditional notation
It is crucial to recognize when a variable and that same
variable under intervention are the same. Consider the
intervention on engagement, as in figure 7.8.
Figure 7.8 In the original DAG (left), there are two d-connected paths
between Side-Quest Engagement and In-Game Purchases. These paths
equate to two sources of statistical dependence between the two
variables. After graph surgery, only the causal path remains, reflecting
causal dependence.
Is P (G |E=“high”) (the probability distribution of Guild
Membership given high Side-Quest Engagement) the same
as P(G)? No. In graphical terms, G and E are d-connected. In
probabilistic terms, we can reason that knowing a player’s
level of Side-Quest Engagement is predictive of whether they
are in a guild.
But is P (GE=“high”) the same as P(G )? Yes. Guild Membership
is not affected by the intervention on Side-Quest
Engagement because it can only affect variables causally
downstream of Side-Quest Engagement. Thus P (GE=“high”) is
equivalent to P(G).

In general terms, empirically learning a distribution for a
variable YX = x requires doing the intervention do(X = x) in
real life. However, that real-life intervention, at best, has a
cost and, at worst, is infeasible or impossible. So if we can
equate YX = x to some distribution involving Y that we can
learn from observational data, that’s a win. That’s going from
correlation to causation. In trivial cases, we can do this by
looking at the graph, as we did with G and GE=“high”. But
usually, we’ll need to do some mathematical derivation,
either by hand or using algorithms.
This task of deriving equality between variables that are and
aren’t subject to intervention is called identification, and it is
the heart of causal inference theory. We’ll examine
identification at length in chapter 10.
7.3.3 Causal models represent all intervention
distributions
As generative models, the causal models we’ve worked with
encode a joint probability distribution of components of the
DGP. Inference algorithms enable those models to represent
(e.g., through Monte Carlo sampling) the conditional
distribution of some subset of those components, given the
state of the other components.
We’ve now introduced the ideal intervention and how it
changes the DGP and, consequently, the joint probability
distribution of the variables. Figure 7.9 illustrates how the
generative causal model captures the original DGP (and
corresponding probability distributions) and any new DGP
(and corresponding probability distributions) created by
intervening in the original process.

Figure 7.9 Suppose our DGP has variables X, Y, and Z. A traditional
generative model (left) uses observations of X, Y, and Z to statistically
learn a representation of P(X, Y, Z). A generative causal model (right)
encodes a representation P(X, Y, Z) and distributions derived by
interventions on X, Y, and Z. In that way, the generative causal model
represents a broad family of distributions.
Consider the statistical implications of this idea. Given data,
an ordinary generative model learns a representation of the
joint probability distribution. But a generative causal model
learns not only that distribution but any new distribution that
would be derived by applying some set of ideal
interventions. That’s how our causal model of the online
game was able to reproduce the outcome of an experiment
from observational data alone.

7.4 Interventions and causal effects
The most common use case for our formal model of an
intervention will be to model causal effects. Now that we’ve
defined and formalized interventions, causal effects are easy
to think about; they are simply comparisons between the
outcomes of interventions.
7.4.1 Average treatment effects with binary
causes
The most common causal effect query is the average
treatment effect (ATE). Here, we’ll focus on the case where
we are interested in the causal effect of X on Y, and X is
binary, meaning it has two outcomes: 1 and 0. Binary causes
entail experiments where the cause has a “treatment” value
and a “control” value, such as “A/B tests.” Using do-notation,
the ATE is E (Y  |do(X = 1)) – E (Y  |do(X = 0)) (recall E (…)
means “the expectation of …”). Using counterfactual
notation, the ATE is E (YX = 1) – E (YX = 0). The advantage of
the counterfactual notation is that we can collapse this into
one expectation term, E(YX=1 – YX=0).
7.4.2 Average treatment effect with categorical
causes
When the cause is categorical, the ATE requires choosing
which levels of the cause you want to compare. For example,
if X has possible outcomes {a, b, c}, you might select “a” to
be a baseline, and work with two ATEs, E (YX = b – YX = a) and
E (YX = c – YX = a). Alternatively, you may choose to work with
all pairwise comparisons of levels of X, or just convert X to a
binary variable with outcomes “a” and “not a” The choice
depends on which ATE is most meaningful to you.

7.4.3 Average treatment effect for continuous
causes
If we want to generalize E (YX = 1 – YX = 0) to the case where X
is continuous, we arrive at derivative calculus. For some
baseline do(X = x), imagine changing the intervention value
x by some small amount Δ, i.e., do(X = x + Δ). Taking the
difference between the two outcomes, we get E (YX = x + Δ –
YX = x). Then we can ask, what is the rate of change of E(YX)
as we make Δ infinitesimally smaller. This brings us to the
definition of the derivative:
Note that this is a function, rather than a point value; when
you plug in a value of x, you get the rate of change of YX = x
of the X versus Yx curve.
As a practical example, consider the case of pharmacology,
where we want to establish the ATE of a drug dose on a
health outcome. The drug dose is continuous, and it usually
follows a nonlinear S-curve-like shape; we get more effect as
we increase the dose, but eventually the effect gets
diminishing returns at higher doses. The derivative gives us
the rate of change of the average response for a given dose
on the dose-response curve.
7.4.4 Conditional average treatment effect
The conditional average treatment effect (CATE) is an ATE
conditioned on other covariates. For example, in our online
game example, E(IE=“high” – IE=“low”) is the ATE on In-Game
Purchases for Side-Quest Engagement. If we wished to

understand the ATE for guild members, we’d want E(IE=“high”
– IE=“low”| G=“member”).
In practical settings, it is often important to work with CATEs
instead of ATEs, because CATEs can have big differences
with ATEs and other CATEs with different conditions. In other
words, CATEs better reflect the heterogeneity of treatment
effects across a population. For example, it is possible that
the ATE of a drug on a health outcome is positive across the
overall population, but the CATE conditioned on a specific
subpopulation (e.g., people with a certain allergy) could be
negative. Similarly, in advertising, certain ad copy might
drive your customers to purchase more on average, but
cause some segment of your customers to purchase less.
You can optimize the return on investment for your ad
campaign by understanding the CATEs for each segment, or
to use CATE-based reasoning to do customer segmentation.
Experts often emphasize the importance of measuring
heterogenous treatment effects with CATEs, lest one think a
point value estimate of an ATE tells the full picture. But in
our probabilistic modeling approach, heterogeneity is front
and center. If we have a causal graphical model and a model
of ideal intervention, then we can model P (YX = x). If we can
model P (YX = x), then we can model P (YX = 1 – YX = 0). We can
then use that model to inspect all the variation within P (YX = 
1 – YX = 0), including who in the target population falls above
or below 0 or some other threshold.
7.4.5 Statistical measures of association and
causality
In statistics, an effect size is a value that measures the
strength or intensity of the relationship between two
variables or groups. For example, in our observational

analysis of the online gaming data, we quantified the
relationship between Side-Quest Engagement E and In-Game
Purchases I as E (I  |E =“high”) – E (I  |E =“low”). Our statistical
procedure estimated this true effect size with a difference in
sample averages between both groups. We then conducted a
hypothesis test. We specified a null hypothesis E (I  |E 
=“high”) – E (I  |E =“low”) = 0, and then tested if this effect
size estimate was statistically different from 0 using a p-
value calculated under some null hypothesis distribution
(usually a normal or t-distribution).
A causal effect is just an interventional effect size; in our
example, it was E (I  |do(E =“high”)) – E(I  |do(E =“low”)) = E 
(IE = “high” – IE = “low”), which is the ATE. The statistical
hypothesis testing procedure is the same as before. Indeed,
we still need to test if sample-based estimates of ATEs and
CATEs are statistically significant. When you conduct a
statistical significance test with data from an experiment
with a treatment and control, you are testing an estimate of
the ATE by definition.
7.4.6 Causality and regression models
Suppose X is continuous, but its relationship with YX is linear.
Then the ATE d E (YX=x)/dx is a point value because the
derivative of a linear function is a constant. Therefore, if you
use a linear model of E (YX), then the coefficient for X in that
model corresponds to the ATE for X.
For this reason, linear regression modeling is a popular
approach to modeling causal effects (even when people
don’t really believe the causal relationship is linear).

This convenience extends to other generalized linear
models. Suppose Poisson regression or logistic regression are
better models of E (YX) than linear regression. These models
capture measures of association between two variables not
as a difference in means, but as ratios. For example, we can
read relative risk (RR) directly from a Poisson regression
model and odds ratios (OR) directly from a logistic regression
model. In general, these measures of association have no
causal interpretation, but we give them a causal
interpretation once we use them with interventional
variables. For example, if we are modeling E (YX), and YX is
binary, the relative risk and odds ratios are as follows:
Thus, traditional non-causal ways of quantifying statistical
association become measures of causal association once we
use them in an interventional context. And when we fit these
regression models to data, we can still use all the traditional
regression methods for significance testing (Wald tests, F-
tests, likelihood ratio tests, etc.).
7.5 Stochastic interventions
Stochastic interventions are an important generalization of
ideal interventions. The second rule of the ideal intervention
is that the intervention is set to a fixed value. In the
stochastic intervention, that value is the outcome of a
random process; i.e., it is itself a random variable. Most texts
treat stochastic interventions as an advanced topic beyond

the scope of an introduction to causal modeling, but I make
special mention of them as they are important in machine
learning, where we often seek data-driven automation.
Stochastic interventions are important for automatic
selection of interventions.
7.5.1 Random assignment in an experiment is a
stochastic intervention
For example, the digital experimentation platform in our
online gaming experiment automatically assigned players to
high- and low-engagement groups. It did so randomly.
Random assignment is a stochastic intervention; it targets
the Side-Quest Engagement variable and sets its value by
digitally flipping a coin.
Note that randomization is more than what we need to arrive
at the right answer. Indeed, in our simulation of the
experiment, there was no randomization, only ideal
interventions. Those ideal interventions were sufficient to d-
separate the path Side-Quest Engagement ← Guild
Membership → In-Game Purchases, removing the statistical
dependence that comes from that path. If randomization is
not necessary to quantify the causal relationship, why is it
called “the gold standard of causal inference?” The answer is
that randomization works when your causal DAG is wrong.
For example, suppose that when we did the experiment,
rather than randomizing players into the high versus low
Side-Quest Engagement group, the digital experimentation
platform automatically assigned the first 500 players who
logged on to the group with high Side-Quest Engagement
and the next 500 players to the group with low Side-Quest
Engagement. This intervention would be sufficient to d-
separate the path Side-Quest Engagement ← Guild
Membership → In-Game Purchases. But what if our DAG was

wrong, and there are other paths between Side-Quest
Engagement and In-Game Purchases through unknown
common causes?
Figure 7.10 considers what happens when our DAG is wrong
—our model is the DAG on the right. Consider what would
happen if, instead, the true DAG were the DAG on the left.
For the DAG on the left, the time of day when the player logs
on drives both the Side-Quest Engagement and In-Game
Purchases.
Figure 7.10 Left: the true causal relationships. Right: your (incorrect)
causal DAG.
Suppose, for example, people who log on earlier tend not to
be logging on with friends. They tend to engage more in
side-quests because side-quests are amenable to solo
gameplay. People who plan missions with friends tend to log
on later, since some friends have real-world appointments
during the day. Friends playing together focus more on the
game’s primary narrative and avoid side-quests. Also,
players tend to spend more money on In-Game Purchases
later in the day, corresponding to the broader trend of late-
day spending in e-commerce.

When we intervene on a player to assign them to one group
or another based on their login, that intervention value now
depends on the time of day, as shown in figure 7.11.
The left side of figure 7.11 illustrates the result of an
intervention on Side-Quest Engagement that depends on the
time of day. As we expected, the intervention performs graph
surgery, removing the incoming edges to Side-Quest
Engagement E: T→E and G →E. However, the value set by the
intervention is now determined by time of day T, via a
time_select function. The time_select function assigns “high”
engagement to every player whose login time is before that
of the 501st player to log on and “low” for those who logged
in after. After graph surgery, we add back a new causal edge
T→E whose mechanism is time_select. Thus, there is still a
noncausal statistical association that biases the experiment
via the d-connected path I ←T→E.

Figure 7.11 An intervention that sets the level of Side-Quest
Engagement based on login time changes, but doesn’t eliminate, the
causal relationship T→E. In contrast, randomization eliminates incoming
edges to E.
In contrast, randomization on the right side of figure 7.11 did
what we hoped, removing all the incoming edges to E. It
removed the edge from T→E even though our assumed DAG
did not know that T→E existed. Indeed, if there are other
unknown common causes between E and I, randomization
will remove those incoming edges to E, as in figure 7.12.

Figure 7.12 Randomization eliminates incoming edges from unknown
common causes.
The ability of randomization to eliminate statistical bias from
common causes we failed to account for in our assumptions
is why it is considered “the gold standard of causal
inference.” But to understand stochastic interventions, note
that both assignment mechanisms: one based on login time
and the other using randomization, are stochastic
interventions. Both set the Side-Quest Engagement level of a
player using a random process; one depends on when
someone logs in, and the other depends on a coin flip.
7.5.2 Intervention policies
Stochastic interventions are closely related to policies in
automated decision-making domains, such as bandit
algorithms and reinforcement learning. In these domains, an
agent (e.g., a robot, a recommender algorithm) operates in
some environment. A policy is an algorithm that takes as
input the state of some variables in the environment and
returns an action for the agent to execute. If there are

elements of randomness in the selection of that action, it is a
stochastic intervention.
In our previous example, randomization is a policy that
selects interventions at random. But in automated decision-
making, most policies choose interventions based on the
state of other variables in the system, much like the biased
experiment that intervenes based on the time of day
variable. Of course, policies in automated decision-making
are typically trying to optimize some utility function rather
than bias an experiment. We’ll focus on causality in
automated decision-making in chapter 12.
7.6 Practical considerations in
modeling interventions
I’ll close this chapter with some practical considerations for
modeling interventions. We’ll consider how ideal (and
stochastic) interventions allow us to model the impossible.
Then we’ll make sure we ground that modeling in
pragmatism.
7.6.1 Reasoning about interventions that we
can’t do in reality
In our online gaming example, we used an intervention
operator on a causal model to replicate the results of an
experiment. I presented a choice between actually running
an experiment and simulating the experiment. Simulation
avoids the costs of running the experiment, but running the
experiment is more robust to errors in causal assumptions,
especially with tools like randomization.
However, there are many times when we can’t run an
experiment, because doing so is either infeasible, unethical,

or impossible.
Example of an infeasible experiment —A randomized
experiment that tests the effect of interest rates on
intergenerational wealth.
Example of an unethical experiment —A randomized
experiment 
that 
tests 
the 
effect 
of 
caffeine 
on
miscarriages.
Example of an impossible experiment —A randomized
experiment that tests the effects of black hole size on
spectroscopic redshift.
In these scenarios, simulation with a causal model is our only
choice.
7.6.2 Refutation and real-world interventions
Suppose your causal model predicts the outcome of an
intervention. You then do that intervention in the real world,
such as with a controlled experiment. If your predicted
intervention outcome conflicts with your actual intervention
outcome, your causal model is wrong.
In chapter 4, we discussed the concept of validating, or
rather, refuting, a causal model by checking data for
evidence of dependence that violates the conditional
independence implications of the model’s DAG. In chapter
11, we’ll extend refutation from the causal DAG all the way
to a causal inference of interest (e.g., estimating a causal
effect). However, comparing predicted and actual
intervention outcomes gives us a stronger refutation
standard than the methods in chapters 4 and 11. The catch,
of course, is that doing these real-world interventions must
be feasible.

Assuming they are, comparing predicted and real-world
intervention outcomes provides a nice iterative framework
for building a causal model. First, enumerate a set of
interventions you can apply in the real world. Select one of
those interventions, use your model to predict its outcome,
and then do the intervention in the real world. If the
outcomes don’t match, update your model so that it does.
Repeat until you have exhausted your ability to run real-
world interventions.
Doing a real-world intervention usually costs resources and
time. To save on costs, use your causal model to predict all
the interventions you can run, rank the predicted outcomes
according to which are more interesting or surprising, and
then prioritize running real-world interventions according to
this ranking. Interesting or surprising intervention predictions
are likely a sign your model is wrong, so prioritizing them
means you’ll make big updates to your model sooner and at
less cost. And if your model turns out to be right, you will
have spent less to arrive at some important insights into
your DGP.
7.6.3 “No causation without manipulation”
The idea behind “no causation without manipulation” is that
one should define the variables in the causal model such
that the mechanics of how one might intervene in it is clear.
Clarity here means you could run a real-world experiment
that implemented the intervention, or, if the experiment
were infeasible, unethical, or impossible, you could at least
clearly articulate how the hypothetical experiment would
work. “No causation without manipulation” is essentially
trying to tether a causal model’s abstractions to
experimental semantics.

For example, proponents of this idea might object to having
“race” as a cause in a causal model, because the concept of
race is nebulous from the standpoint of an intervention
applied in an experiment—how would you change
somebody’s race while holding constant everything about
that person not caused by their race? They would prefer
defining the variable in terms precise enough to be
theoretically intervenable, such as “racial bias of loan
officer” or “racial indicators on application form.” Of course,
we have important questions to ask about fuzzy abstractions
like “race,” so we don’t want to add so much precision that
we can’t generalize the results of our analyses in ways that
help answer those questions.
One strategy for establishing this tether to experimentation
is to include variables in our model that we can manipulate
in a hypothetical experiment. For example, if we are
interested in the causal relationship wealth → anxiety, we
could add a “cash subsidy” variable and cash subsidy →
wealth edge. Cash subsidy represents direct payments to an
individual, which is easier to do in an experiment than
directly manipulating an individual’s wealth.
7.6.4 Modeling “non-ideal” interventions
Often the types of interventions we use in practical settings
can be challenging to map to ideal interventions. For
example, a biologist might be studying the causal
relationships between the expression of different genes in a
cell, with causal relationships like gene A → gene B → gene C.
The biologist might want to know how a stressor in the
cellular environment (e.g., a toxin or hypoxia) affects gene
expression. The stressor is an intervention; it changes the
DGP. However, modeling it as an ideal intervention is
challenging because it will likely be unclear which genes
those stressors affect directly or what specific amount of

gene expression is set by the stressor. A practical solution for
these interventions is to model them explicitly as root nodes
in the causal DAG, such as the hypoxia node in figure 7.13.
Figure 7.13 “Hypoxia” is an intervention that has no specific target.
Include it as a root node with edges to all variables that are possibly
affected.
Explicit representation of interventions as part of the DGP is
less expressive than the ideal (or stochastic) intervention,
which captures how an arbitrary intervention can change the
DGP.
Summary
An intervention is an action that changes the data
generating process (DGP). Interventions are fundamental
to defining causality and causal models.
Many, if not most, machine learning–driven decisions are
interventions that can render the model’s deployment
environment different from its training environment.
The ability to model an intervention allows one to
simulate the outcome of experiments.
Simulating experiments with an intervention model can
save costs or enable simulated experiments when
running an actual experiment is infeasible, unethical, or
impossible.

An ideal intervention targets specific variables, fixes
them to a specific value, and renders the target
independent of its causal parents.
Causal effects are simple extensions of intervention
distributions. For example, the average treatment effect
(ATE) of X on Y is E(YX=1) – E(YX=0), the difference in
means between two intervention distributions for Y.
Conditional average treatment effects (CATEs) are simply
differences in conditional expectations for intervention
distributions on Y.
Stochastic interventions are like ideal interventions, but
they fix the intervention targets at a value determined
by some random process. That value could depend on
the states of other variables in the system. In this way,
they are related to policies in automated decision-
making 
domains 
such 
as 
bandit 
algorithms 
and
reinforcement learning.
An intervention operator describes how a causal model is
altered to reflect an ideal (or stochastic) intervention.
The intervention operator for a structural causal model
replaces the target variables assignment function with
the intervention value.
Graph surgery is the intervention operator for causal
DAGs.
The intervention operator for causal graphical models
applies graph surgery and replaces the causal Markov
kernel for the target with a degenerate distribution that
places all probability on the intervention value.
Causal models can use observational data to statistically
learn 
the 
observational 
distribution 
and 
any
interventional distribution that can be derived through
the intervention operator.
Randomization 
is 
a 
stochastic 
intervention 
that
eliminates causal influence on the intervention target

from unknown causes.
“No causation without manipulation” suggests defining
your causal model so that interventions are tethered to
hypothetical experiments.
You can model interventions that don’t meet the ideal
intervention standard as root nodes with outgoing edges
to variables they may affect.
[1] D.T. Campbell and T.D. Cook, Quasi-experimentation:
Design & Analysis Issues for Field Settings (Rand McNally,
1979), p36.

8 Counterfactuals and
parallel worlds
This chapter covers
Motivating examples for counterfactual reasoning
Turning counterfactual questions into symbolic form
Building 
parallel 
world 
graphs 
for 
counterfactual
reasoning
Implementing the counterfactual inference algorithm
Building counterfactual deep generative models of
images
Marjani, a good friend of mine, once had to choose between
two dating prospects at the same time. She had something
of a mental score card for an ideal long-term match. She had
good chemistry with one guy, but he didn’t rank well on the
score card. In contrast, the second guy checked all the
boxes, so she chose him. But after some time, despite him
meeting all her criteria, she couldn’t muster any feelings for
him. It was like a failed ritual summoning; the stars were
perfectly aligned, but the summoned spirit never showed up.
And so, as any of us would in that situation, she posed the
counterfactual question:
I chose a partner based on my criteria and it’s not
working out. Would it have worked out if I chose based
on chemistry?
Counterfactual queries like this describe hypothetical events
that did not occur but could have occurred if something had
been different. Counterfactuals are fundamental to how we

define causality; if the answer to Marjani’s question is yes, it
implies that choosing based on her score card caused her
love life to be unsuccessful.
Counterfactuals are core to the bread-and-butter question of
causal effect inference, where we compare observed
outcomes to “potential outcomes” that didn’t happen, like
the outcome of Marjani’s love life if she chose a partner
based on chemistry. More broadly, answering counterfactual
questions is useful in learning policies for better decision-
making. When some action leads to some outcome, and you
ask how a different action might have led to a different
outcome, a good answer can help you select better actions
in the future. For example, after this experience, Marjani
revised her score card to factor in chemistry when
considering later romantic prospects.
We’ll look at practical examples in this chapter, but I led with
this love and romance example because it is universally
relatable. It illustrates how fundamental counterfactual
reasoning is to human cognition—our judgments about the
world are fueled by our imagination of what could have
been.
Note that Marjani’s counterfactual reasoning involves a type
of prediction. Like a Marvel superhero film, she is imagining a
parallel world where she chose based on chemistry, and
she’s predicting the outcome of her love life in that world.
But statistical machine learning algorithms are better at
making predictions than humans. That insight leads us to the
prospect of building AI that automates human-like
counterfactual reasoning with statistical machine learning
tools.
In this chapter, we’ll pursue that goal by learning to
formalize counterfactual questions with probability. In the
next chapter, we’ll implement a probabilistic counterfactual

inference algorithm that can answer these questions. Let’s
start by exploring some practical case studies that motivate
algorithmic counterfactual reasoning.
8.1 Motivating counterfactual
reasoning
Here, I’ll introduce some case studies demonstrating the
business value of answering counterfactual questions. I’ll
then argue how they are useful for enhancing decision-
making.
8.1.1 Online gaming
Recall the online gaming example from chapter 7, where the
amount of in-game purchases a player made was driven by
their level of engagement in side-quests and whether they
were in a guild. Suppose we observed an individual player
who was highly engaged in side-quests and had many in-
game purchases. A counterfactual question of interest might
be, “What would their amount of in-game purchases be if
their engagement was low?”
8.1.2 The streaming wars
The intense competition amongst subscription streaming
companies for a finite market of subscribers has been
dubbed “the streaming wars.” Netflix is a dominant player
with long experience in the space. It has learned to attract
new subscribers by building blockbuster franchises from
scratch, such as House of Cards, Stranger Things, and Squid
Game.
However, Netflix competes with Amazon, Apple, and Disney
—companies with extremely deep pockets. They can

compete with Netflix’s ability to build franchises from scratch
by simply buying existing successful franchises (e.g., Star
Wars) and making novel content within that franchise (e.g.,
The Mandalorian).
Suppose that Disney is in talks to buy James Bond, the most
valuable spy thriller franchise ever, and Netflix believes that
a successful Bond deal may cause it to lose subscribers to
Disney. Netflix hopes to prevent this by striking a deal with a
famous showrunner to create a new spy-thriller franchise
called Dead Drop. This new franchise would combine tried
and true spy thriller tropes (e.g., gadgetry, exotic backdrops,
car chases, over-the-top action sequences) with the complex
characters, diverse representation, and emotionally
compelling storylines characteristic of Netflix-produced
shows. There is uncertainty about whether Netflix executives
can close a deal with the candidate showrunner, as both
parties would have to agree on creative control, budget,
royalties, etc.
Suppose the Bond deal succeeded, and Disney Plus now runs
new series and films set in the “Bond-verse.” However, the
Dead Drop deal fell through. Netflix then acquires data that
identifies some subscribers who subsequently left Netflix,
subscribed to Disney Plus, and went on to watch the new
Bond content.
A Netflix executive would be inclined to ask the following
counterfactual: “Would those lost subscribers have stayed,
had the Dead Drop deal succeeded?” Suppose the answer is
“no,” because the Bond content was so strong an attraction
that the Dead Drop deal outcome didn’t matter. In this case,
the employees who failed to close the deal should not be
blamed for losing subscribers.
Or, suppose the Dead Drop deal succeeded, and Netflix
subscribers can now watch the new Dead Drop franchise.

“Would those subscribers who watch Dead Drop have left for
the new Bond series on Disney, had the deal failed?” Again,
if the answer is “no,” the employees who successfully closed
the deal shouldn’t get credit for keeping all those
subscribers.
In both cases, answering these questions would help inform
future deal-making decisions.
8.1.3 Counterfactuals analysis of machine
learning models
In this chapter, we are focusing on using a causal model to
reason counterfactually about some data generating
process. In machine learning, often the goal is a
counterfactual analysis of a machine learning model itself;
i.e., given some input features and some output predictions,
how would the predictions have differed if the inputs were
different? This counterfactual analysis supports explainable
AI (XAI), AI fairness, and other tasks.
COUNTERFACTUAL ANALYSIS IN CLASSIFICATION
Consider the task of classification—a trained algorithm takes
as input some set of features for a given example and
produces a predicted class for that example. For example,
given the details of a loan application, an algorithm classifies
the application as “reject” or “approve.”
Given a rejected application, a counterfactual question
naturally arises: “Would the application have been approved
if some elements of the application were different?” Often,
the goal of the counterfactual analysis is to find a minimal
change to the feature vector that corresponds to a change in
the classification. Figure 8.1 illustrates this idea.

Figure 8.1 What is the minimal change to the input feature that would
have led to approval? In this case, the loan would have been approved if
income were $20,000 higher.
Finding the minimal change that would have led to approval
requires defining a distance metric in the feature space and
then finding the feature value on the other side of the class
boundary. In this example, the hypothetical condition “if the
applicant had $20,000 more a year in income . . .”
corresponds to the smallest change to the feature vector (in
terms of distance on the decision surface) that would have
led to approval. This type of analysis is useful for XAI; i.e., for
understanding how features drive classification on a case-by-
case basis.
COUNTERFACTUAL ALGORITHMIC RECOURSE
Increasing salary by $20,000 is unrealistic for most loan
applicants. That’s where counterfactual-based algorithmic
recourse can be useful. Algorithmic recourse looks for the
nearest hypothetical condition that would have led to a
different classification. It operates under the constraint that
the hypothetical condition was achievable or actionable by
the applicant. Figure 8.2 shows how this works.

In this example, the assumption is that increasing income by
$5,000 and improving one’s credit score was achievable,
according to some criteria (while increasing income by
$20,000 was not).
Figure 8.2 In algorithmic recourse, we’re often interested in the nearest
actionable feature vector on the other side of the decision boundary.
Algorithmic recourse aims to give individuals subjected to
machine learning–based decisions information that they can
work with. If one fails an exam and asks why, an explanation
of “because you are not a genius” is less useful than
“because you didn’t review the practice exam,” even though
both may be true.
COUNTERFACTUAL FAIRNESS
Counterfactual fairness analysis is a similar analysis that
applies in cases where some of the input features correspond
to attributes of a person. The idea is that certain attributes of
an individual person should not, on ethical grounds, impact
the classification. For example, it is unethical to use one’s
ethnicity or gender in the decision to offer a loan. Even if
such “protected attributes” are not explicitly coded into the
input features, the classification algorithm may have learned

proxies for protected attributes, such as the neighborhood
where one lives, one’s social network, shopping habits, etc. It
may make sense to have such features in the model, and it
may not be obvious when those features behave as proxies
for protected attributes.
Figure 8.3 uses the loan algorithm example to illustrate how
a counterfactual fairness analysis would ask counterfactual
questions. In this case, the counterfactual question is “Would
this person have been approved if they were of a different
ethnicity?” The analyst would find features that are proxies
for ethnicity and then see if a change to those proxies
corresponding to a change in ethnicity would result in a
classification of “approve.” Some techniques attempt to use
this analysis during training to produce fairer algorithms.
Figure 8.3 For counterfactual fairness, suppose we want to test whether
the algorithm has a bias against certain ethnicities. For a given feature
vector, an ethnicity element, and a corresponding “reject” outcome, we
test if the outcome would change if the ethnicity element changed.
While counterfactual fairness analysis is not enough to solve
the broad problem of AI fairness, it is an essential element in
the AI fairness toolkit.

8.1.4 Regret and why do we care about what
“would have happened?”
Traditional machine learning is usually forward-looking. Given
data, you make a prediction, that prediction drives some
decision to be made in the present, and that decision brings
about some future cost or benefit. We want good predictions
so we can get more future benefits. Imagine, for example, a
machine learning algorithm that could accurately forecast
the performance of a stock portfolio—that would obviously
be quite valuable.
Now, imagine a different algorithm that could accurately tell
you how your portfolio would perform today if you had
bought different stocks; that would certainly be less valuable
than predicting the future. This contrast highlights a common
criticism that modeling counterfactuals is backward-looking.
For example, the counterfactual questions in our motivating
case studies focus on decisions and outcomes that happened
in the past. What’s done is done; getting the answers to such
questions won’t change the past.
But, first, not all counterfactuals are retrospective. In section
8.3 we’ll model questions like “What are the chances the
subscriber would churn if you don’t send them a promotion
and would not churn if you did send a promotion?” (“Churn”
means to stop using a product or service within a certain
time period.) That question has no past tense, does have
business value, and is something we can model.
Second, retrospective counterfactuals help you understand
how to make better decisions in the future. Indeed, analyzing
how your portfolio would have performed given different
allocations—what investors call “backtesting”—is ideal for
comparing various investment strategies. Similarly, the
counterfactual insights from a failed Dead Drop deal might

help Netflix executives make a deal with another famous
showrunner.
When we consider retrospective reasoning about things that
would have or could have been, we arrive at the notion of
regret. Regret is about retrospective counterfactual
contrasts; given a choice, regret is a comparison between an
outcome of the option you chose and an imagined
counterfactual outcome of an option you rejected. In
colloquial terms, regret is the bad feeling you get when the
counterfactual outcome of an option you rejected is better
than the option you chose. But cognitive science calls this
negative regret; there is also positive regret, which is the
good feeling you get when, upon comparing to imagined
counterfactual outcomes, you realize you chose the better
option (as in, “whew, I really dodged a bullet”).
Regret can be useful for learning to make better decisions.
Suppose you make a choice, you pay a cost (time, effort,
resources, etc.), and it leads to an outcome. That gives you a
baseline single point of data for learning. Now, suppose that,
with the benefit of hindsight, you could imagine with 100%
accuracy the outcome that would have occurred had you
made a different choice. Now you have two comparable
points of data for learning, and you only had to pay a cost for
one of them.
Usually your ability to imagine the counterfactual outcome of
the rejected option is not 100% accurate. Even with the
benefit of hindsight, there is still some uncertainty about the
counterfactual outcome. But that’s no problem—we can
model that uncertainty with probability. As long as hindsight
knowledge provides you with some information about
counterfactual outcomes, you can do better than the
baseline of learning from a single point of data.

In reinforcement learning and other automated decision-
making, we often call our decision-making criteria “policies.”
We can incorporate counterfactual analysis and regret in
evaluating and updating policies.
8.1.5 Reinforcement learning and automated
decision-making
In automated decision-making, a “policy” is a function that
takes in information about a decision problem and
automatically selects some course of action. Reinforcement
learning algorithms aim to find policies that optimize good
outcomes over time.
Automated counterfactual reasoning can credit good
outcomes to the appropriate actions. In the investing
example, we can imagine an algorithm that periodically
backtests different portfolio allocation policies as more
recent prices enter the data. Similarly, imagine we were
writing a reinforcement learning (RL) algorithm to learn to
play a game. We could have the algorithm use saved game
instances to simulate how that game instance would have
turned out differently if it had used a different policy. The
algorithm can quantify the concept of regret by comparing
those simulated outcomes to actual outcomes and using the
results to learn a better policy. This would reduce the number
of games the AI needed to learn a good policy, as well as
enable it to learn from simulated conditions that don’t occur
normally in the game. We’ll focus more on automated
decision-making, bandits, and reinforcement learning in
chapter 12.
8.1.6 Steps to answering a counterfactual query
Across each of these applications, we can answer these
counterfactual inference questions with the following

workflow:
1. Pose the counterfactual question —Clearly articulate the
counterfactual question(s) we want to pose in the
simplest terms.
2. Convert to a mathematical query —Convert the query to
mathematical symbols so it is formal enough to apply
mathematical or algorithmic analysis.
3. Do inference —Run an inference algorithm that will
generate an answer to the question.
In the following sections, we’ll focus on steps 1 and 2. In
chapter 9, we’ll handle step 3 with an SCM-based algorithm
for inferring the query we create in step 2. In chapter 10,
we’ll see ways to do step 3 without an SCM but only data
and a DAG.
8.2 Symbolic representation of
counterfactuals
In chapter 7, we saw the “counterfactual notation,” which
uses subscripts to represent interventions. Now we are going
to use this notation for counterfactual expressions. The trick
is remembering, as we’ll see, that counterfactual queries are
just a special type of interventional queries. We’ll see how
interventional queries flow into counterfactual queries by
revisiting our online gaming example.
8.2.1 Hypothetical statements and questions
Consider our online gaming case study. When considering
how much a player makes, we might say something like this:
The level of in-game purchases for a typical player would
be more than $50.

We’ll call this a hypothetical statement. In grammatical
terms, I am using a modal verb (e.g., “would”, “could”,
“should” in “would be more”) to intentionally mark
hypothetical language rather than using declarative
language (e.g., “is more” or “will be more”), which we use to
make statements about objective facts.
We want to formalize this statement in probability notation.
For this statement, we’ll write P (I  >  50)—recall that we used
the random variable I to represent In-Game Purchases, E to
represent Side-Quest Engagement, and G to represent Guild
Membership.
We’ll use hypothetical language in our open questions as
well, like this:
What would be the amount of in-game purchases for a
typical player?
I am inquiring about the range of values the variable I could
take, and I represent that with P(I).

DECLARATIVE VS. HYPOTHETICAL LANGUAGE AND PROBABILITY
Declarative language express certainty, as in “amount of
in-game purchases is more than $50.” In contrast,
hypothetical language is used for statements that convey
conjecture, imagination, and supposition, as in “amount of
in-game purchases would be more than $50.”
Many of us learn to associate probability notation with
declarative language, because of probability theory’s
connection to propositional logic: P(I>50) quantifies the
probability that the declarative statement “amount of in-
game purchases is more than $50” is true. But we are
going to lean into the hypothetical language.
Hypothetical language has an implicit lack of certainty—we
are talking of things that could be, rather than things that
are. Lack of certainty is equivalent to uncertainty, and the
Bayesian philosophy we adopt in this book nudges us
toward using probability to model uncertainty, so using
hypothetical language will make it easier for us to
formalize the question in probability notation. We’ll find
this will help us formalize causal statements and
questions.
Note that the tense of the question or statement doesn’t
matter when we map it to probabilistic notation. For
example, we could have used this phrasing:
What would have been the amount of in-game purchases
for a typical player?
Regardless of tense, we use the notation P (I  ) to represent
our uncertainty about a variable of interest in our question.

8.2.2 Facts filter hypotheticals to a
subpopulation
Suppose my statement was as follows:
The level of in-game purchases for a player with high
side-quest engagement would be more than $50. P(
I>50| E=“high”)
Here, I am making a statement about a subset of players
(those with high side-quest engagement) rather than all
players. I’m doing the same when I ask this question:
What would be the level of in-game purchases for
players with high side-quest engagement? P( I|
E=“high”)
The fact that Side-Quest Engagement is high serves to filter
the population of players down to those for whom that fact is
true. As discussed in chapter 2, we use conditional
probability to zoom in on a subpopulation. In this example,
we use P (I  >  50|E=“high”) for the statement, and P 
(I |E=“high”) for the question.
I’ll use “factual conditions” to refer to facts, events, and
evidence like E = “high” that narrow down the target
population. These factual conditions appear on the right side
of “|” in the conditional probability notation P (.|.). We might
normally call them “conditions,” but I want to avoid
confusion with “conditional hypothetical,” which I’ll introduce
next.
8.2.3 Conditional hypotheticals, interventions,
and simulation
Now, suppose I made the following statement:

If a player’s side-quest engagement was high, they
would spend more than $50 on in-game purchases. P ( I E
=“high”>50)
We’ll call this a conditional hypothetical statement. We’ll call
the “If side-quest engagement was high” part the
hypothetical condition, and “they would spend more than
$50 on in-game purchases” is the hypothetical outcome.
The hypothetical conditions in conditional hypothetical
questions often follow a similar “what if” style of phrasing:
What would be the amount of in-game purchases for a
player if their side-quest engagement was high? P ( I E
=“high”)
We will use the intervention notation (i.e., the subscripts in
counterfactual notation) to represent these conditions. For
the statement, we will use P(IE=“high”>50), and for the
question, P (IE=“high”).
IMAGINATION, CONDITIONS, AND INTERVENTIONS
Using the ideal intervention to model hypothetical conditions
in conditional hypothetical statements is a philosophical
keystone of our causal modeling approach. The idea is that
when we pose hypothetical conditionals, we only attend to
the causal consequences of the hypothetical conditional.

REFRESHER: IDEAL INTERVENTION
An ideal intervention is a change to the data generating
process that does the following:
1. Targets a fixed variable (e.g., X)
2. Sets that variable to a specific value (e.g., x)
3. In so doing, severs the causal influence of that
variable’s parents
This definition generalizes to a set of variables.
We sometimes write interventions with do-notation, as in
do(X=x). In counterfactual notation, for a variable Y, we
write YX=x to indicate that the variable Y is under the
influence of an intervention on X. In a DAG, we represent
ideal intervention with graph surgery, meaning we cut the
incoming edges to the target variable. In an SCM, we
represent an ideal intervention by replacing the target
variable’s assignment function with the intervention value.
Causal libraries often implement these operations for us,
often with a function or method called “do”.
Let me illustrate by counterexample. Suppose we ask this:
What would be the amount of in-game purchases for a
player if their side-quest engagement were high?
Suppose we then modeled this with P (I |E = “high”). Then
inference on this query would use not just the causal impact
that high engagement has on In-Game Purchases but also
the non-causal association through the path E ← G → I; you
can infer whether a player is in a guild from their level of
Side-Quest Engagement, and Guild Membership also drives
In-Game Purchases. But this question is not about Guild

Membership; we’re just interested in how Side-Quest
Engagement drives In-Game Purchases.
“What if” hypotheticals use the ideal intervention because
they attend only to the causal consequences of the
condition. To illustrate, let’s rephrase the previous question
to make that implied ideal intervention explicit:
What would be the amount of In-Game Purchases for a
player if their side-quest engagement were set to high?
P ( I E =“high”)
The verb “set” connotes the action of intervening. Modeling
hypothetical conditions with ideal interventions argues that
the original phrasing and this phrasing mean the same thing
(going forward, I’ll use the original phrasing).
As humans, we answer “what if” questions like the preceding
P (IE=“high”) question (either the original or rephrased version)
by imagining a world where the hypothetical condition is true
and then imagining how the hypothetical scenario plays out
as a consequence. The variables in our hypothetical
condition may have their own causal drivers in the data-
generating process (e.g., Guild Membership is a cause of
Side-Quest Engagement), but we ignore those drivers
because we are only interested in the consequences of the
hypothetical condition. We isolate the variables in a
hypothetical condition in our imaginations just as we would
in an experiment. The ideal intervention is the right tool for
setting a variable independently of its causes.
AVOIDING CONFUSION BETWEEN FACTUAL AND
HYPOTHETICAL CONDITIONS
It is particularly easy to confuse “factual conditions” with
“hypothetical conditions.” To reiterate in general terms, in

the question “What would Y be if X were x”, X = x is a
hypothetical condition and we use the notation P (YX=x). In
contrast, factual conditions serve to narrow down the
population we are asking about. For example, in the question
“What would Y be for cases where X is x ?” X = x is an actual
condition used to filter down to cases where X = x. Here, we
use notation P (Y  |X = x ).
Keep in mind that we can combine factual and hypothetical
conditions, as in the following question:
What would be the amount of in-game purchases for a
player in a guild if their side-quest engagement was
high? P ( I E =“high”| G= g)
Here, we are asking a conditional hypothetical on a subset of
players who are guild members. This query is different from
the following:
What would be the amount of in-game purchases for a
player if their side-quest engagement was high and they
were in a guild? P ( I E =“high”, G =“member”)
That said, with the ambiguity of natural language, someone
might ask the second question when what they really want is
the answer to the first question. It is up to the modeler to
dispel confusion, clarify meaning, and write down the correct
notation.
8.2.4 Counterfactual statements
In natural language, a counterfactual statement is a
conditional hypothetical statement where there is some
conflict between factual conditions and hypothetical
conditions or outcomes. In other words, it is a conditional
hypothetical statement that is “counter to the facts.”

In everyday language, those conflicting factual conditions
could be stated before the statement or implied by context.
For our purposes, we’ll require counterfactual statements to
state the conflicting factual conditions explicitly:
For a player with low side-quest engagement and an
amount of in-game purchases less than $50, if the
player’s side-quest engagement were high, they would
spend more than $50 on in-game purchases. P ( I E
=“high”>50| E=“low”, I  £50)
As a question, we might ask:
What would be the amount of in-game purchases for a
player with low side-quest engagement and in-game
purchases less than $50 if their side-quest engagement
was high? P ( I E =“high” | E=“low”, I  £50)
In both the statement and the question, the factual condition
of low engagement conflicts with the hypothetical condition
of high engagement. In the statement, the hypothetical
outcome where in-game purchases is more than 50 conflicts
with the factual condition where it is less than or equal to 50.
Similarly, the question considers all possible hypothetical
outcomes for in-game purchases, most of which conflict with
the factual condition of being less than or equal to 50. We
use counterfactual notation to write these queries just as we
would other conditional hypotheticals..

OVERVIEW OF TERMINOLOGY IN FORMALIZING COUNTERFACTUALS
Hypothetical language—Used to express hypotheses,
conjecture, supposition, and imagined possibilities. In
English, it often involves “would” or “could” and contrasts
with the declarative language. It is arguably easier to
formalize causal statements and questions phrased in
hypothetical language.
Hypothetical statement—A statement about the world
phrased in hypothetical language, such as “Y would be y,”
which we’d write in math as P(Y=y).
Factual conditions—Refer to facts, events, and evidence
that narrow down the scope of what’s being talked about
(the target population). Used as the conditions in
conditional probability. For example, we’d write “Where Z
is z, Y would be y” as P(Y=y|Z=z).
Hypothetical conditions—Conditions that frame a
hypothetical scenario, as in “what if X were x?” or “If X
were x …” We model hypothetical conditions with the ideal
intervention and subscript X=x in counterfactual notation.
Conditional hypothetical statement—A hypothetical
statement with hypothetical conditions, such as “If X were
x, Y would be y,” which becomes P(YX=x=y). We can add
factual conditions like “Where Z is z, if X were x, Y would
be y” becomes P(YX=x=y|Z=z).
Counterfactual statement—A counterfactual statement is a
conditional hypothetical statement where the variables in
the factual conditions overlap with those in the
hypothetical conditions or hypothetical outcomes. For
example, in “Where X is x, if X were x', Y would be y”
(P(YX=x'=y|X=x)), the factual condition “Where X is x”

overlaps with the hypothetical condition “if X were x'”. In
“Where Y is y, if X were x', Y would be y'”
(P(YX=x'=y'|Y=y)), the factual condition “Where Y is y”
overlaps with the hypothetical outcome “Y would be y.”
Consistency rule—You can drop a hypothetical condition in
the subscript if a factual condition and a hypothetical
condition overlap but don’t conflict. For example,
P(YX=x|X=x) = P(Y|X=x).
Note that many texts will use the word “counterfactual” to
describe formal causal queries that don’t necessarily
condition on factual conditions, such as YX=x or P(YX=x=y)
or P(YX=x=1, YX=x'=0). I’m using “counterfactual
statement” and other phrases above to describe common
hypothetical and counterfactual natural language and to
aid in the task of converting to formal counterfactual
notation.
Note that we can combine conflicting factual conditions with
other non-conflicting factual conditions, such as being a
member of the guild in this example:
What would be the amount of in-game purchases for a
player in a guild with low side-quest engagement and in-
game purchases less than $50 if their side-quest
engagement was high? P( I E =“high” | E=“low”, I £50,
G=“member”)
Figure 8.4 diagrams the elements of a formalized
counterfactual query.

Figure 8.4 Elements of a conditional counterfactual hypothetical
formalized in counterfactual notation
FORMALIZING COUNTERFACTUALS WITH LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS
Formalizing a counterfactual question into counterfactual
notation is an excellent task for a large language model
(LLM). State-of-the-art LLMs perform quite well at
benchmarks where a natural language query is converted
to a symbolic query, such as an SQL statement, and
formalizing a counterfactual question is an example of this
task. We’ll look more at LLMs and causality in chapter 13,
but for now you can experiment with prompting your
favorite LLM to convert questions to counterfactual
notation.
8.2.5 The consistency rule
Consider the distribution P (IE=“high”|E = “low”). Suppose that
instead of the subscript E=“high” we had E=“low”, so the
distribution is P (IE=“low” |E = “low”). The consistency rule
states that this distribution is equivalent to the simpler P (I |E 
= “low”). More generally, P (YX=x|X = x, Z = z ) = P (Y |X = x, Z 
= z ) for any z.
Intuitively, P (IE=“low”|E=“low”) corresponds to the rather odd
question, “What would be the amount of in-game purchases
for a player with low side-quest engagement if their side-

quest engagement was low?” In this question, the factual
condition and the hypothetical condition overlap but don’t
conflict. The consistency rule says that, in this case, we drop
the hypothetical condition, saying that this is equivalent to
asking “What would be the amount of in-game purchases for
a player with low side-quest engagement?”
Now consider a version of this counterfactual where we
observe an actual outcome for in-game purchases.
Specifically, consider P (IE=“high”|E =“low”, I=75). This is the
corresponding counterfactual question:
What would be the amount of in-game purchases for a
player with low side-quest engagement and in-game
purchases equal to $75 if their side-quest engagement
was high?
Now, instead, suppose we changed it to P (IE=“low”|E = “low”,
I = 75). By the consistency rule, this collapses to P (I  |E 
=“low”, I = 75):
What would be the amount of in-game purchases for a
player with low side-quest engagement and in-game
purchases equal to $75?
The answer, of course, is $75. If we ask about the
distribution of I conditional on I = 75, then we have a
distribution with all the probability value concentrated on 75.
In counterfactual reasoning, we often want to know about
hypothetical outcomes for the same variables we observe in
the factual conditions. The consistency rule states that if the
hypothetical conditions are the same as what actually
happened, the hypothetical outcome must be the same as
what actually happened.

Recall that we use an intervention to model the hypothetical
condition. The rule assures us that if a player had low Side-
Quest Engagement and a certain amount of In-Game
Purchases, they would have the exact same amount of In-
Game Purchases if they were selected for an experiment that
randomly selected them for the low Side-Quest Engagement
group. That’s important if we expect our causal inferences to
predict the outcomes of experiments.
8.2.6 More examples
Table 8.1 presents several additional examples of mapping
counterfactual questions to counterfactual notation.

Table 8.1 Examples of counterfactual notation
Question
Type
Distribution in
counterfactual
notation
What would be the amount
of in-game purchases for a
typical player?
Hypothetical
P( I)
What would be the amount
of in-game purchases for a
player with high side-quest
engagement?
Hypothetical focused on
highly engaged players
P( I| E=“high”)
What would be the amount
of in-game purchases for a
player if they had high
side-quest engagement?
Conditional hypothetical
P( I E =“high”)
What would be the level of
engagement and amount
of in-game purchases if the
player were a guild
member?
Conditional hypothetical
on two outcomes of
interest
P( E G =“member”,
I G =“member”)
What would be the level of
in-game purchases for a
player if they had high
side-quest engagement
and they were not a guild
member?
Conditional hypothetical
with two hypothetical
conditions
P( I E =“high”, G
=“nonmember”)
What would be the level of
in-game purchases for a
player in a guild if they had
high side-quest
engagement?
Conditional hypothetical
focused on guild members
P( I E =“high”|
G=“member”)
For a player with low
engagement, what would
their level of in-game
purchases be if their level
of engagement was high?
Counterfactual. Factual
condition conflicts with
hypothetical condition.
P( I E =“high”|
E=“low”)
For a player who had at
most $50 of in-game
purchases, what would
their level of in-game
purchases be if their level
of engagement was high?
Counterfactual. Factual
condition (in-game
purchases of £$50)
conflicts with possible
hypothetical outcomes (in-
P( I E =“high”| I
£50)

Question
Type
Distribution in
counterfactual
notation
game purchases possibly
>$50).
For a player who had low
engagement and at most
$50 of in-game purchases,
what would their level of
in-game purchases be if
their level of engagement
was high?
Counterfactual. Factual
conditions conflict with a
hypothetical condition and
possible hypothetical
outcomes.
P( I E =“high”|
E=“low”, I £50)
For a player in a guild who
had low engagement, what
would their level of in-
game purchases be if their
engagement were high and
they weren’t a guild
member?
Counterfactual. Factual
conditions conflict with
hypothetical conditions.
P( I E =“high”, G
=“nonmember”|
E=“low”,
G=“member”)
What would be the level of
engagement if the player
were a guild member?
Moreover, what would be
their level of in-game
purchases if they were not
a guild member?
Counterfactual. Involves
two conflicting
hypothetical conditions on
two different outcomes.
P( E G =“member”,
I G =“nonmember”)
The last case in table 8.1 is a special case, more common in
theory than practice, that does not involve a factual
condition but has conflicting hypothetical conditions.
Next, we’ll look at a particular class of counterfactuals that
involve binary causes and outcomes.
8.3 Binary counterfactuals
An important subclass of counterfactual query is one we’ll
call binary counterfactuals. These are counterfactuals
involving binary hypothetical conditions and outcome
variables. Binary variables, especially binary causes, arise
when we think in terms of observational and experimental

studies, where we have “exposed” and “unexposed” groups,
or “treatments” and “control” groups. But binary variables
are also useful in reasoning about the occurrence of events;
an event either happens or does not.
Binary counterfactual queries deserve special mention
because they are often simpler to think about, have
simplifying mathematical properties that queries on
nonbinary variables lack, and have several practical
applications that we’ll cover in this section. Further, you can
often word the question you want to answer in binary terms,
such that you can convert nonbinary variables to binary
variables when formalizing your query. To illustrate, in our
online gaming example, suppose a player made $152.34 in
online purchases, and we ask “Why did this player pay so
much?” We are not interested in why they paid exactly that
specific amount but why they paid such a high amount,
where “such a high amount” is defined as, for example, more
than $120. So our binary indicator variable is X = {1 if I ≥
120 else 0}.
8.3.1 Probabilities of causation
The probabilities of causation are an especially useful class
of binary counterfactuals. Their utility lies in helping us
answer “why” questions. They are foundational concepts in
practical applications, including attribution in marketing,
credit assignment in reinforcement learning, root cause
analysis in engineering, and personalized medicine.
Let’s demonstrate the usefulness of the probabilities of
causation in the context of a churn attribution problem. In a
subscription business model, churn is the rate at which your
service loses subscribers, and it has a major impact on the
value of a business or business unit. Typically, a company
deploys a predictive algorithm that rates subscribers as

having some degree of churn risk. The company wants to
discourage subscribers with a high risk of churn from actually
doing so. In our example, the company will send a promotion
that will entice the subscriber to stay (not churn). The
probabilities of causation can help us understand why a user
would churn or stay.
Given a binary (true/false) cause X and outcome Y, we’ll
define the following probabilities of causation: probability of
necessity, of sufficiency, of necessity and sufficiency, of
enablement, and of disablement.
PROBABILITY OF NECESSITY
For a binary cause X and binary outcome Y, the probability of
necessity (PN) is the query P (YX= 0 = 0|X = 1, Y = 1). In plain
language, the question underlying PN is “For cases where X
happened, and Y happened, if X had not happened, would Y
not have happened?” In other words, did X need to happen
for Y to happen?
Let’s consider our churn problem. Let X represent whether
we sent a promotion and Y represent whether the user
stayed (didn’t churn). In this example, P(YX= 0 = 0|X = 1, Y = 
1) represents the query “For a subscriber who received the
promotion and stayed, what are the chances they would
have churned if they had not received the promotion?” In
other words, was the promotional offer necessary to
maintain the subscriber?
PROBABILITY OF SUFFICIENCY
The probability of sufficiency (PS) is P (YX= 1= 1|X = 0, Y = 0).
A common plain language articulation of PS is “For cases
where neither X nor Y happened, if X had happened, would Y

have happened?” In other words, is X happening sufficient to
cause Y to happen? For example, “for users who did not
receive a promotion and didn’t stay (churned), would they
have stayed had they received the promotion?” In other
words, would a promotion have been enough (sufficient) to
keep them?
The plain language interpretation of sufficiency can be
confusing. The factual conditions of the counterfactual query
zoom in on cases where X = 0 and Y = 0 (cases where neither
X nor Y happened). However, we’re often interested in
looking at cases where X=1 and Y=1 and asking if X was
sufficient by itself to cause Y = 1. In other words, given that X
happened and Y happened, would Y still have happened
even if the various other events that influenced Y had turned
out different? But P (YX=1=1|X = 0, Y = 0) entails this
interpretation without requiring us to enumerate all the
“various other events that influenced Y” in the query. See the
chapter notes at https://www.altdeep.ai/p/causalaibook for
pointers to deeper research discussions on sufficiency.

PROBABILITIES OF CAUSATION AND THE LAW
The probabilities of causation are closely related to legal
concepts in the law. It is helpful to know this relationship,
since practical applications often intersect with the law,
and many stakeholders we work with in practical settings
have legal training.
But-for causation and the probability of necessity—The
but-for test is one test for determining causation in tort
and criminal law. The way we phrase the probability of
necessity is the probabilistic equivalent to the but-for
test, rephrasing “if X had not happened, would Y not
have happened?” as “but for X happening, would Y
have happened?”
Proximal causality and the probability of sufficiency—In
law, proximate cause refers to the primacy that a
cause X had in the chain of events that directly brings
about an outcome (e.g., injury or damage). There is
indeed a connection with sufficiency, though not an
equivalency. 
Proximal 
causality 
indeed 
considers
whether a causal event was sufficient to cause the
outcome, but legal theories of proximal cause often go
beyond sufficiency to invoke moral judgments as well.
PROBABILITY OF NECESSITY AND SUFFICIENCY
The probability of necessity and sufficiency (PNS) is P(YX=1= 
1, YX=0 = 0). In plain language, P(YX=1= 1, YX=0= 0) reads, “Y
would be 0 if X were 0 and Y would be 1 if X were 1.” For
example, “What are the chances that a given user would
churn if they didn’t receive a promotion and would stay if
they did receive a promotion?” PNS decomposes as follows:

PROBABILITY OF DISABLEMENT AND ENABLEMENT
The probabilities of disablement (PD) and enablement (PE)
are similar to PN and PS, except they do not condition on the
cause X.
PD is the query P (YX= 0= 0|Y = 1), meaning “For cases where
Y happened, if X had not happened would Y not have
happened?” For the churn problem, PD asks the question
“What is the overall chance of churn if we don’t send
promotions? exclusively in reference to the subpopulation of
users who didn’t churn (regardless of whether they received
a promotion).
PE is the query P (YX=1=1|Y = 0), or “For cases where Y didn’t
happen, if X had happened, would Y have happened?” In our
churn problem, PE asks, “What is the overall chance of
staying if we send promotions?” exclusively in reference to
the subpopulation of users who churned (regardless of
whether they received a promotion).
The probabilities of causation can work as basic
counterfactual primitives in advanced applications of
counterfactual analysis. Next, I’ll give an example in the
context of attribution.
8.3.2 Probabilities of causation and attribution
The probabilities of causation are the core ingredients for
methods that quantify why a given outcome happens. For
example, suppose that a company’s network has a faulty
server, such that accessing the server can cause the network
to crash. Suppose the network crashes, and you’re tasked
with analyzing the logs to find the root cause. You find that

your colleague Lazlo has accessed the faulty server. Is Lazlo
to blame?
To answer that, you might quantify the chances that Lazlo
was a sufficient cause of the crash; i.e., the chance that
Lazlo accessing the server was enough to tip the domino
that ultimately led to the network to crash. Second, what are
the chances that Lazlo was a necessary cause? For example,
perhaps Lazlo wasn’t a necessary cause because if he hadn’t
accessed the server, someone else would have eventually.
The probabilities of causation need to be combined with
other elements to provide a complete view of attribution.
One example is the concept of abnormality. The abnormality
of a causal event describes whether that event, in some
sense, violated expectations. For example, Lazlo might get
more blame for crashing the network if it was highly unusual
for employees to access that server. We can quantify the
abnormality of a causal event with probability; if event X=1
was abnormal, then it was unlikely to have occurred, so we
assign a low value to P(X=1). One attribution measure,
called actual causal strength (ACS), combines abnormality
with probabilities of causation as follows:
In other words, this approach views attribution as a trade-off
between being an abnormal necessary cause and a normal
sufficient cause.
There is also a growing body of methods that combine
attribution methods from the field of explainable AI (e.g.,
Shapley and SHAP values) with concepts of abnormality and
causal concepts, such as the probabilities of causation. See
the book notes at https://www.altdeep.ai/p/causalaibook for a
list of references, including actual causal strength and
explainable AI methods.

8.3.3 Binary counterfactuals and uplift modeling
Statistical analysis of campaigns to influence human
behavior is common in business, politics, and research. For
instance, in our churn example, the goal of offering a
promotion is to convince people not to churn. Similarly,
businesses advertise to convince people to buy their
products, and politicians reach out to voters to get them to
vote or donate to a campaign.
One of the challenges of campaigns to influence behavior is
identifying who is likely to respond favorably to your attempt
to influence so you only spend your limited resources
influencing those people. John Wanamaker, a pioneer of the
field of marketing, put it best:
Half the money I spend on advertising is wasted; the
trouble is I don’t know which half.
Uplift modeling refers to a class of statistical techniques that
seek to answer this question with data. However, a data
scientist approaching this problem space for the first time
will find various statistical approaches, varying in
terminology, presumptive data types, modeling assumptions,
and modeling approaches, leading to confusion. Binary
counterfactuals are quite useful in understanding the
problem at a high level and how various solutions succeed or
fail at addressing it.
SEGMENTING USERS INTO PERSUADABLES, SURE
THINGS, LOST CAUSES, AND SLEEPING DOGS
In our churn example, we can assume there are two kinds of
subscribers. For some subscribers, a promotion will influence
their decision to churn. Others are non-responders, meaning

people for whom the promotion will have no influence. We
can break up the latter non-responders into two groups:
Lost causes —People who will churn regardless of
whether they receive a promotion
Sure things —People who will stay regardless of whether
they receive a promotion
Of the people who do respond to the promotion, we have two
groups:
Persuadables —Subscribers who could be persuaded by a
promotion not to leave the service
Sleeping dogs —Subscribers who would not churn if you
didn’t send a promotion, and people who would churn if
you did
Sleeping dogs are named for the expression “let sleeping
dogs lie” (last they wake up and bite you). These people will
do what you want if you leave them alone, but they’ll behave
against your wishes if you don’t. Have you ever received a
marketing email from a subscription service and thought,
“These people send me too much spam! I’m going to
cancel.” You were a “sleeping dog”—the company’s email
was the kick that woke you up, and you bit them for it. Figure
8.5 shows how our subscribers break down into these four
segments.

Figure 8.5 In attempts to influence behavior, we break down the target
population into these four segments. Given limited resources, we want
to target our influence efforts on the persuadables and avoid the
others, especially the sleeping dogs.
Promotions have a cost in terms of the additional value you
give to the subscriber. You want to avoid spending that cost
on subscribers who weren’t going to churn (sure things) and
subscribers who were always going to churn (lost causes).
And you definitely want to avoid spending that cost only to
cause someone to churn (sleeping dogs). So, of these four
groups, you want to send your promotions only to the
persuadables. The task of statistical analysis is to segment
our users into these four groups.
This is where counterfactuals can help us; we can define
each segment in probabilistic counterfactual terms:
Lost causes —People who probably would churn if we
send a promotion and still churn if we did not send a
promotion; i.e., P(YX=1=0, YX=0=0) is high.
Sure things —People who probably would stay if we send
a promotion and stay if we did not send a promotion; i.e.,
P(YX=1=1, YX=0=1) is high.
Persuadables —People who probably would stay if we
send a promotion and churn if we did not send a

promotion; i.e., P(YX=1=1, YX=0=0) is high. In other
words, PNS is high.
Sleeping dogs —People who probably would churn if we
send a promotion and would stay if we did not send a
promotion; i.e., P(YX=1=0, YX=0=1) is high.
You can see, in figure 8.6, how the population can be
segmented.
Figure 8.6 We can segment the population in counterfactual terms.
USING COUNTERFACTUALS FOR SEGMENTATION
Each subscriber has some set of attributes (demographics,
usage habits, content preferences, etc.). Our goal is to
convert these attributes to predict whether a subscriber is a
persuadable, sleeping dog, lost cause, or sure thing.
Let C represent a set of subscriber attributes. Given a
subscriber with attributes C=c, our causal query of interest is
P(YX=1, YX=0|C=c). Various statistical segmentation methods
seek to define C such that users fall into groups that have
high probability for one of the four outcomes of P(YX=1,
YX=0|C=c), but before we apply the stats, our first task will
be to ensure we can estimate this query using sufficient
assumptions and data. We’ll cover how to estimate

counterfactuals with SCMs in chapter 9 and how to use
identification with broader estimation techniques in chapter
10.
Now that we’ve learned to pose our causal query and
formalize it into math, let’s revisit the steps of making the
counterfactual inference, in figure 8.7.
Figure 8.7 The counterfactual inference workflow
In the next section, we’ll study the idea of possible worlds
and parallel world graphs. These ideas are important to both
identification (determining whether we can answer the
question) and the inference algorithm.
8.4 Possible worlds and parallel world
graphs
In this section, I’ll introduce the notion of possible worlds and
parallel world graphs, an extension of a causal DAG for an
SCM that supports counterfactual reasoning across possible
worlds.
8.4.1 Potential outcomes in possible worlds
Counterfactual reasoning involves reasoning over possible
worlds. A possible world is a way the world is or could be.
The actual world is the possible world with the event
outcomes we observed. All other possible worlds are
hypothetical worlds.

In terms of the data generating process (DGP), the actual
world is how the DGP unrolled to produce our data. Other
possible worlds are defined by all the ways the DGP could
have produced different data.
Potential outcomes are a fundamental concept in causal
effect inference. “Potential outcomes” refers to outcomes of
the same variable across differing possible worlds. If you
have a headache and take an aspirin, you might say there
are two potential outcomes in two possible worlds: one
where your headache gets better and one where it doesn’t.
REVIEW OF POSSIBLE WORLD TERMINOLOGY
Possible world—A way the world is or could be
Actual world—A possible world with observed event
outcomes
Hypothetical world—A possible world with no observed
event outcomes
Potential outcomes—Outcomes of the same variable
across differing possible worlds
Parallel worlds—A set of possible worlds being reasoned
over, sharing both common and differing attributes
Parallel world graph—A graphical representation of parallel
worlds used both for identifying counterfactual queries and
in counterfactual inference algorithms

8.4.2 The parallel world graph
A parallel world graph is a simple extension of a causal DAG
that captures causality across possible worlds. Continuing
with the online gaming example, suppose we are interested
in the question, “For a player who had low engagement and
less than $50 of in-game purchases, what would their level
of in-game purchases be if their level of engagement was
high?” I.e., P(IE=“high”|E=“low”, I<50). For this counterfactual
query, we can visualize both the actual and the hypothetical
worlds in figure 8.8
Figure 8.8 To answer the counterfactual query for the online gaming
example, we start by duplicating the causal DAG across possible worlds.
We duplicate the causal DAG for the online gaming example
across both possible worlds. Having one DAG for each world
reflects that the causal structure of the DGP is the same in
each world. But we’ll need to connect these DAGs in some
way to reason across worlds.
We’ll connect the two worlds using an SCM defined on the
causal DAG. We’ll suppose that the original nodes of the DAG

are the endogenous variables of the SCM and expand the
DAG visualization by adding the exogenous variables.
Further, the two causal DAGs will use the same exogenous
nodes. We call the resulting graph a parallel world graph (or,
for this typical case of two possible worlds, a “twin-world
graph”). Figure 8.9 visualizes the parallel world graph.
Figure 8.9 In the parallel world graph, we use the exogenous variables
in an SCM to unite the duplicate causal DAGs across worlds. The result
is a single SCM with duplicate endogenous variables.

REFRESHER: THE STRUCTURAL CAUSAL MODEL (SCM)
An SCM is a causal model with the following components:
Endogenous variables—Endogenous variables are the
variables we specifically want to model.
Exogenous variables—A set of exogenous variables.
Exogenous variables are proxies for all the causes of
our endogenous variables we don’t wish to model
explicitly. In our formulation, we pair each endogenous
variable X with a single exogenous variable NX (there
are more general formulations).
Exogenous 
distributions—To 
use 
the 
SCM 
as 
a
generative model, we need a set of marginal
probability distributions for each exogenous variable,
such as P(NX), which represents the modeler’s
uncertainty about the values NX.
Functional assignments—Each endogenous variable
has a functional assignment that sets its value
deterministically, given its parents.
For example, written as a generative model, an SCM for
our online game model would look as follows.

The assignment functions induce the causal DAG; each
variable is a node, the exogenous variables are root nodes,
and the inputs of a variable’s assignment function
correspond to its parents in the DAG. The SCM is a
particular case of a causal graphical model where
endogenous variables are set by deterministic functions
rather than sampled from causal Markov kernels.
The result is a single SCM with one shared set of exogenous
variables and duplicate sets of endogenous variables—one
set for each possible world. Note that in an SCM, the
endogenous variables are set deterministically, given the
exogenous variables. So upon observing that E = “low” and I  
< 50 in the actual world, we know that the hypothetical
outcomes of E and I must be the same. Indeed, even though
Guild Membership (G ) is a latent variable in the actual world,
we know that whatever value G takes in the actual world
must be the same as in the hypothetical world. In other
words, our SCM upholds the consistency rule, as illustrated in
figure 8.10. In figure 8.10, the E and I in the actual world are
observed variables because we condition on them in the
query P (IE=“high”|E = “low”, I < 50).

Figure 8.10 In an SCM, the endogenous variables are set
deterministically, given the exogenous variables. In this model, the
endogenous variables are duplicated across worlds. Therefore, upon
observing low engagement and less than $50 of in-game purchases in
the actual world, we know that those values must be the same in the
hypothetical world unless we change something in the hypothetical
world.
8.4.3 Applying the hypothetical condition via
graph surgery
The hypothetical world will, typically, differ from the actual
world by the hypothetical condition. For example, in P 
(IE=“high”|E = “low”, I < 50), “if engagement were high”
(E=“high”) differs from the factual condition “engagement was
low” (E = “low”). As we’ve discussed, we model the
hypothetical condition with the ideal intervention—we
intervene on E, setting it to “high” in the hypothetical world.
We model the ideal intervention on the graph with graph

surgery—we’ll remove incoming edges to the E variable in
the hypothetical world as in figure 8.11.
Figure 8.11 The ideal intervention and graph surgery represents the
hypothetical condition in the hypothetical world. In this setting, the
outcome for I in the hypothetical world can now take a different
outcome than it has in the actual world because its parent E has a
different outcome than it has in the actual world.
Now the outcome for In-Game Purchases (I  ) in the
hypothetical world can take a different outcome than the
actual world’s outcome of I = 50 because its causal parent E
has different outcomes in each world.

8.4.4 Reasoning across more than two possible
worlds
The counterfactual notation and the parallel worlds graph
formalism support counterfactual reasoning that extends
across more than two possible worlds. To illustrate, let’s refer
back to the Netflix example at the beginning of the chapter.
Summarizing the story, the key variables in that narrative
are as follows:
Disney is trying to close a deal to buy the Bond
franchise. Let B = “success” if the deal closes.
Otherwise, B = “fail”.
Netflix is trying to close a deal to start a new spy
franchise called Dead Drop. D = “success” if the Dead
Drop deal closes and “fail” otherwise. If the Bond deal
closes, it will affect the terms of this deal. Therefore, B
causes D.
If the Dead Drop deal closes, it will affect engagement in
spy-thriller-related content on Netflix. Let E = “high” if a
subscriber’s engagement in Netflix’s spy-thriller content
is high and “low” otherwise.
The outcome of the Bond deal and the Dead Drop deal
will both affect the attrition of spy-thriller fans to Disney.
Let A be the rate of attrition to Disney.
With this case study, the following multi-world counterfactual
is plausible. Suppose the Bond deal was successful (B =
“success”), but Netflix’s Dead Drop deal failed, and as a
result, engagement was low (E = “low”) and Netflix attrition
to Disney is 10 percent. Figure 8.12 illustrates this actual
world outcome.
As a Netflix executive, you start wondering about attribution.
You assume that engagement would have been high if the

Dead Drop deal had been successful. You ask the following
counterfactual question:
Disney’s Bond deal succeeded, the Dead Drop deal
failed, and as a result, Netflix’s spy thriller engagement
was low, and attrition to Disney was 10%. I assume that
had the Dead Drop deal been successful, engagement
would have been high. In that case, how much
attribution would there have been?
We can implement this assumption with world 2 in the
parallel world graph in figure 8.13.
Figure 8.12 A causal DAG representing the Netflix case study. The light
gray nodes are observed outcomes in the actual world. The dark nodes
are latent variables.

Figure 8.13 The second possible world represents the assumption that if
the Dead Drop deal was successful (via intervention D=“success”)
engagement would have been high (ED=“success”=“high”).
Finally, you wonder what the level of Netflix attrition would
be if the Bond deal had failed. But you wonder this based on
your second-world assumption that engagement would be
high if the Dead Drop deal had been successful. Since the
Bond deal failing is a hypothetical condition that conflicts
with the Bond deal success condition in the second world,
you need a third world, as illustrated in figure 8.14.

Figure 8.14 Given the actual outcomes in world 1, the hypothetical
conditions and outcomes in world 2, you pose conditions in world 3 and
reason about attrition in world 3.
In summary, this is the counterfactual question:
Disney’s Bond deal succeeded, the Dead Drop deal
failed, and as a result, Netflix’s spy thriller engagement
was low, and attrition to Disney was 10%. I assume that
had the Dead Drop deal been successful, engagement
would have been high. In that case, how much
attribution would there have been if the Bond deal had
failed?
Note that the preceding reasoning is different from the
following:

Disney’s Bond deal succeeded, the Dead Drop deal
failed, and as a result, Netflix’s spy thriller engagement
was low, and attrition to Disney was 10%. I assume that
had the Dead Drop deal been successful and the Bond
deal failed, engagement would have been high. In that
case, how much attribution would there have been?
Figure 8.15 illustrates the latter question.
Figure 8.15 In the case of assuming EB=“fail”,D=“success”, only two
worlds are needed.
The latter question assumes engagement would be high if
the Bond deal failed and the Dead Drop deal was successful
(EB=“fail”, D=“success”=“high”). In contrast, the former “three
world” question assumes engagement would be high if both
deals were successful. Then, in the third world, It allows for

different possible levels of engagement in the hypothetical
scenario where the Bond deal failed. For example, perhaps
engagement would be high since Netflix would have its spy-
thriller franchise and Disney wouldn't. Or perhaps, without a
Bond reboot there would be less overall interest in spy-
thrillers, resulting in low engagement in Dead Drop.
8.4.5 Rule of thumb: Hypothetical worlds should
be simpler
Consider again the endogenous nodes in our online gaming
example in figure 8.16. Notice that, in this example, the two
worlds have the same sets of endogenous nodes, and the
edges in the hypothetical world are a subset of the edges of
those in the actual world. In other words, the possible world
where we do intervene is simpler than the possible world
where we condition on evidence.

Figure 8.16 The graph representing the possible world with the
hypothetical conditional is simpler than the graph representing the
actual world.
Similarly, in the three-world graph for the Netflix case study,
world 3 is a subgraph of world 2, which is a subgraph of
world 1. As an algorithmic rule of thumb, it is useful to have
this descending ordering on possible worlds. This rule of
thumb reduces the risk of algorithmic instability.
That said, there are use cases for having more complicated
hypothetical worlds. For example, a modeler could introduce
new nodes as conditions in the hypothetical world. Or they
could use stochastic interventions that randomly introduce
new edges in the hypothetical world. Indeed, human
counterfactual reasoning can be quite imaginative. Exploring
such approaches could lead to interesting new algorithms for
causal AI.

In the next chapter, we’ll dive into using parallel world
graphs in an algorithm for general counterfactual inference.
Summary
Counterfactual statements describe hypothetical events
that potentially conflict with actual events. They are
fundamental to defining causality.
Counterfactual reasoning supports learning policies for
better decision-making.
Counterfactual 
reasoning 
involves 
reasoning 
over
possible worlds. A possible world is a way the world is or
could be. The actual world is a possible world with event
outcomes we observed. Other possible worlds are
hypothetical worlds.
In machine learning, often the goal is counterfactual
analysis of a machine learning model itself. Here, we
reason about how a prediction would have been different
if elements of the input feature vector were different.
Counterfactual analysis in classification can help find the
minimal change in features that would have led to a
different classification.
Counterfactual analysis supports explainable AI by
helping identify changes to features that would have
changed the prediction outcome on a case-by-case basis.
Counterfactual analysis supports algorithmic recourse by
identifying actionable changes to features that would
change the prediction outcome.
Counterfactual 
analysis 
supports 
AI 
fairness 
by
identifying 
features 
corresponding 
to 
protected
attributes where changes to said features would change
the prediction outcome.
“Potential outcomes” is a commonly used term that
refers to outcomes for a given variable from across

possible worlds.
We can use the ideal intervention and parallel world
graphs to model hypothetical conditions in natural
language counterfactual statements and questions.
Counterfactual notation helps represent hypothetical
statements and questions in the language of probability.
Probability can be used to quantify uncertainty about the
truth of hypothetical statements and questions, including
counterfactuals.
Using hypothetical language rather than declarative
language 
helps 
with 
formalizing 
a 
counterfactual
statement or question into counterfactual notation. Using
hypothetical language implies imagined possibility, and
thus uncertainty, which invites us to think about the
probability of a hypothetical statement being true.
Binary counterfactual queries refer to queries on
variables (hypothetical conditions and outcomes) that
are binary.
The probabilities of causation, such as the probability of
necessity (PN), probability of sufficiency (PS), and
probability of necessity and sufficiency (PNS), are binary
counterfactual queries that are useful as primitives in
causal attribution methods and other types of advanced
causal queries.
Binary counterfactual queries are also useful for
distinguishing between “persuadables,” “sure things,”
“lost causes,” and “sleeping dogs” in uplift modeling
problems.
A parallel world graph is a simple extension of a causal
DAG that captures causality across possible worlds. It
represents an SCM over possible worlds that share a
common set of exogenous variables and duplicate sets
of endogenous variables.

9 The general
counterfactual inference
algorithm
This chapter covers
Implementing 
the 
general 
counterfactual 
inference
algorithm
Directly implementing a parallel world DAG as a causal
graphical model
Using a variational inference to implement the algorithm
Building counterfactual deep generative models of
images
The previous chapter taught you how to formalize
counterfactuals and use the parallel world graph to reason
across possible worlds. In this chapter, I’ll introduce an
algorithm for inferring counterfactual queries. Then I’ll
present three case studies showing implementations of the
algorithm using different probabilistic ML approaches.
I call the algorithm we’ll discuss in this chapter the “general”
algorithm for probabilistic counterfactual inference because
you can infer any counterfactual query with this algorithm.
The catch is that you need an SCM. Moreover, differences
between your SCM and the ground-truth SCM can lead to
inaccuracies in your counterfactual inferences. We’ll look
more closely at this issue when we discuss identification in
chapter 10, where you’ll also learn ways of inferring
counterfactuals without knowing the ground-truth SCM. In

this chapter, you’ll see the power of this SCM-based
approach, especially in machine learning.
9.1 Algorithm walkthrough
In this section, we’ll do a high-level walkthrough of the
general algorithm probabilistic counterfactual inference. The
algorithm has three steps commonly called abduction,
action, and prediction:
1. Abduction —Infer the distribution of the exogenous
variables given the factual conditions.
2. Action —Implement the hypothetical condition as an
ideal intervention (graph surgery) in the hypothetical
world.
3. Prediction —Use the conditional distribution on the
exogenous 
variables 
from 
step 
1 
to 
derive 
the
distributions of the hypothetical outcomes.
I’ll illustrate how we can perform these steps using the
parallel world graph for our online gaming example, shown
again as a parallel world graph in figure 9.1.

Figure 9.1 A parallel world graph for the online gaming example
Recall that in this example, guild member G is a cause of
side-quest engagement E and in-game purchases I. Side-
quest engagement is also a cause of in-game purchases.
Note  This example changes the condition I < $50 used
in chapter 8 to I = $50 in order to make the explanations
a bit less verbose. Either condition would work with the
algorithm we’re discussing.
Let’s suppose our counterfactual question is “For a player
with low side-quest engagement and $50 of in-game
purchases, what would their level of in-game purchases be if
their side-quest engagement were high?” The corresponding
query is P(IE =“high”|E=“low”, I=50). Let’s examine how to
apply the algorithm to this query.

9.1.1 Abduction: Infer the exogenous variables
given the observed endogenous variables
The term “abduction” refers to doing abductive inference,
meaning we’re inferring causes from observed outcomes. In
our online gaming SCM, we want to infer the latent
exogenous variables (NG, NE, and NI) from the factual
conditions (E=“low” and I=50).
In our probabilistic modeling approach, we treat the
exogenous variables as latent variables and target them with
probabilistic inference. In our example, we infer NE from
observing E=“low”. Figures 9.2 and 9.3 illustrate the d-
connected paths to inference of NG and NI, respectively.
As you can see in figure 9.2, we have a path from E to NG
through the path E←G←NG. Further, observing both E and I
opens a collider path to NG: E→I←G←NG. Similarly, in figure
9.3, observing E and I also opens a collider path to NI via
E→I←NI.

Figure 9.2 To infer the counterfactual outcomes, we infer the exogenous
variables conditional on observed outcomes in the actual world. There is
a path from E to NG through the path E←G←NG. Also, observing E and I
opens a collider path E→I←G←NG.

Figure 9.3 Observing E and I opens a collider path to NI via E→I←NI.
Finally, observing E has a directly connecting path to NE, as
shown in figure 9.4.

Figure 9.4 E is a direct child of NE, so observing E gives direct
information about NE.
Our SCM is a probabilistic model. In the abduction step, we
use this model to infer P (NG, NE, NI | E = “low”, I = 50). That
inference will follow these paths of dependence.
9.1.2 Action: Implementing the hypothetical
causes
Recall from chapter 8 that we use the ideal intervention to
implement hypothetical conditions. Our hypothetical
condition is “if their side-quest engagement were high,” and
we implement this with an ideal intervention that sets E to
“high” in the hypothetical world. Since we’re using a graph,
we implement the intervention with graph surgery as in
figure 9.5.

Figure 9.5 Implement the hypothetical condition as an ideal intervention
(via graph surgery) in the hypothetical world.
Now the parallel worlds differ. Note that the probability
distributions on the exogenous variables have been updated
with information from the actual world during the abduction
step. In the final step, we’ll propagate this information
through this modified hypothetical world.
9.1.3 Prediction: Inferring hypothetical
outcomes
We’re working with an SCM, so the values of the variables in
the hypothetical world are set deterministically by the
exogenous variables. Having updated the exogenous
variable distributions conditional on observations in the
actual world, we’ll now propagate that actual world

information from the exogenous variables to the endogenous
variables in the hypothetical world. If we hadn’t applied the
intervention in the hypothetical world, the hypothetical world
would mirror everything we observed in the actual world by
the law of consistency (see the definition in chapter 8).
However, since we applied an intervention in the
hypothetical world, the hypothetical variable distributions
downstream of that intervention can differ from those in the
actual world.
Figure 9.6 Paths for inferring the hypothetical distribution of I from the
conditional distribution P(NG, NE, NI| E=“low”, I=50) on the exogenous
variables, given the observed actual world outcomes

In our gaming example, our query P (IE=“high”|E = “low”, I =
50) targets the hypothetical value of IE=“high”. Figure 9.6
illustrates the path of inference from the exogenous
variables to the hypothetical value of IE = “high”. Note that in
this example, the paths of influence only come from NG and
NI, since the intervention on E cut NE’s bridge to the
hypothetical world.
BE CAREFUL ABOUT D-CONNECTION AND D-SEPARATION ON PARALLEL
WORLD GRAPHS
Recall that with a causal DAG, we can use a graphical
criterion called d-separation/d-connection to reason about
conditional independence in the data generating process
using a causal DAG. Indeed, this is what I do when I
highlight paths of inference to IE=“high” given E and I via NI
and NG. I do this to explain the abduction and prediction
steps of the algorithm. However, in general, one cannot
rely on d-separation and d-connection to reason about the
dependence between endogenous variables across worlds.
That’s because the law of consistency requires that the
same endogenous variables across worlds must have the
same value (unless one of the pairs is impacted by an
intervention). Two variables always having the same value
is a perfect dependence; the rules of d-separation do not
capture that dependence on the parallel world graph.
In the next chapter, I’ll introduce counterfactual graphs, a
causal DAG derived from a parallel world graph where the
connections between d-separation and independence hold
across worlds.
We can see how information flows during inference from
factual conditions E=“low” and I=50 in the actual world,

through the exogenous variables, to our target variable
IE=“high” in the hypothetical world. How we implement the
inference depends on our preference for inference
algorithms. For example, suppose fG, and fI represent the
SCM’s assignment functions for G and I. We could use a
simple forward-sampling algorithm:
1. Draw a sample of exogenous values nG, nE, and nI from P 
(NG, NE, NI | E = “low”, I = 50).
2. Derive a sample of the hypothetical value of guild
membership g* = fG(nG).
3. Derive a sample of the hypothetical value of in-game
purchases i* = fI(E = “high”, g*, nI).
4. Repeat many times to get samples from the distribution
P (IE=“high”|E = “low”, I = 50).
5. This would give us samples from our target P (IE=“high”|E 
= “low”, I = 50).
9.1.4 Counterfactual Monte Carlo
The output of the general probabilistic counterfactual
inference algorithm produces samples from a distribution.
Recall from chapter 2 that once you can sample from a
distribution, you can apply the Monte Carlo techniques to
make inferences based on that distribution. That same is
true with counterfactual distributions.
For example, in chapter 8, I introduced the idea of regret,
where we compare counterfactual outcomes. For our player
who had low engagement and only spent $50, we might ask
how much more their in-game purchases would have been
had engagement been high. Given the gamer spent $50, we
can define a regret variable as RE=e = IE=e – 50. By taking

our samples from P (IE=“high” |E = “low”, I = 50) and
subtracting 50, we get samples from P (RE=“high” |E=“low”, I
= 50). We can also take the average of those differences to
estimate expected regret E (RE=“high” |E = “low”, I = 50). Note
that E (…) here refers to the expectation operator, not to
side-quest engagement.
When we want to use these counterfactual Monte Carlo
techniques in automated decision-making algorithms, we are
typically posing counterfactual questions about policies.
Suppose, for example, a recommendation algorithm
recommends certain content to a player based on their
profile. We can contrast the amount of in-game purchases
they made under one recommendation policy to the amount
they would have made under a different policy. We can then
adjust the recommendation algorithm in a way that would
have minimized cumulative regret across players. We’ll look
at automated decision-making more closely in chapter 12.
Next, we’ll explore a few case studies of various ways to
implement this algorithm in code.
9.1.5 Introduction to the case studies
There are several ways we can implement this algorithm
using modern probabilistic ML tools. In sections 9.2–9.4, we’ll
explore three case studies.
MONTY HALL PROBLEM
The first case study will focus on the Monty Hall problem
discussed earlier in section 6.3. We’ll use the pgmpy library
to implement a full parallel-world graphical SCM. We’ll use
pgmpy’s TabularCPD to implement SCM assignment functions,
something it wasn’t designed to do. In exchange for this

awkwardness, we’ll be able to leverage pgmpy’s graph-
based inference algorithm (VariableElimination) to collapse
the abduction and prediction steps into one inference step.
Using graph-based inference will save us from implementing
an inference algorithm for abduction; we only have to build
the model, apply the action step, and run inference.
FEMUR LENGTH AND HEIGHT
Next, we’ll revisit the forensics example from section 6.1,
where we have an SCM in which femur length is a cause of
height. This example will show us how to do the abduction
step with variational inference, a modern and popular
probabilistic inference technique that works well with
cutting-edge deep learning frameworks.
In this example, we’ll implement the SCM in Pyro, a PyTorch-
based library for probabilistic ML. Using Pyro will feel less
awkward than pgmpy because Pyro modeling abstractions
are more flexible. The trade-off is that we must write explicit
inference code for the abduction step.
The example is simple: the data is small, each variable has
only one dimension, and the relationships are linear.
However, we can use the same variational inference-based
abduction technique with the large, high-dimensional, and
nonlinear data settings where variational inference shines.
SEMANTIC IMAGE EDITING WITH COUNTERFACTUALS
In the final case study, we’ll examine how we’d apply the
counterfactual inference algorithm using a pretrained
generative image model in PyTorch. While the Monty Hall and
femur length problems are simple problems with simple
math, this case study demonstrates the use of the algorithm

on a modern problem with image generation in deep
generative AI.
9.2 Case study 1: Monty Hall problem
We’ll start by revisiting the SCM for the Monty Hall problem.
Summarizing again, there is a game show where the player
starts with a choice of three doors. Behind one door is a car.
The player picks a door, say the first door, and the host, who
knows what’s behind the doors, opens another door, say the
third, which does not have the car. The host gives the player
the opportunity to switch doors. In this case, since the player
picked the first door and the host revealed that the car is not
behind the third door, the player can switch to the second
door. The question is whether a strategy of staying with the
original choice or switching doors is better.
The answer is, counterintuitively to many, that a switching
strategy is better—two times out of three, the switching
strategy leads to a win. Figure 9.7 illustrates the possible
outcomes of switching.

Figure 9.7 The Monty Hall problem. Assuming the player initially
chooses the first door, two out of three times the switching strategy will
lead to a win. This illustration assumes the first door is chosen, but the
results are the same regardless of the initial choice of door.

We’ll explore two counterfactual questions:
For a player who stayed with their first door and lost,
what is the probability that they would have won if they
switched doors?
For a player who lost, what is the probability that they
would have won if they switched doors?
We’ll answer these questions with the following steps:
1. Build the parallel world model as a generative graphical
model in pgmpy.
2. Condition on evidence in one world to do inference of
outcomes in the other.
Before we start, we’ll download some tools to help us with
the analysis. Listing 9.1 downloads some helper functions for
working with pgmpy: the do function for implementing ideal
interventions and clone for duplicating a TabularCPD object.
Also, to generate the visualizations, you’ll need to install the
Graphviz visualization library.

SETTING UP YOUR ENVIRONMENT
The code in this chapter was tested with pgmpy version
0.1.25 and Pyro version 1.9.1. I use Matplotlib 3.7 for
plotting. Plotting of the DAGs relies on Graphviz.
Graphviz installation depends on your environment. Using
Ubuntu 22.04, I installed graphvizl via libgraphviz-dev, and
then I installed the Python libraries Graphviz version
0.20.3, PyGraphviz version 1.13, and NetworkX version
3.3.
Depending on your environment, you may need to install
pydot version 3.0. Graphviz and pydot are for plotting only,
so if you get stuck, you could forgo plotting in the rest of
the code.

Listing 9.1 Installing Graphviz and helper functions
import graphviz     #1
import networkx as nx   #1
from networkx.drawing.nx_agraph import write_dot     #1
def plot_graph(G):    #1
    dot_format = nx.nx_pydot.to_pydot(G).to_string()    #1 
    return graphviz.Source(dot_format)   #1
import requests     #2
def download_code(url):     #2
    response = requests.get(url)     #2
    if response.status_code == 200:   #2
        code_content = response.text   #2
        print("Code fetched successfully.")    #2
        return code_content    #2
    else:    #2
        print("Failed to fetch code.")   #2
        return None     #2
url_do = (      #3
    "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/altdeep/"      #3
    "causalML/master/book/pgmpy_do.py"    #3
)     #3
code_do = download_code(url_do)      #3
url_clone = (     #4
    "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/altdeep/"      #4
    "causalML/master/book/chapter%209/hyp_function.py"      #4
)      #4
code_clone = download_code(url_clone)     #4
print(code_do)     #5
print(code_clone)      #5
#exec(code_do)      #5
#exec(code_clone)     #5
#1 Install Graphviz libraries for visualization, and create a helper
function for plotting graphs. This was tested in Ubuntu 22.04.3 but may
depend on your environment. If you have trouble, you can forgo graph
plotting and run the rest of the code.
#2 Helper function for downloading some utilities from GitHub
#3 Download code for a “do” function for applying ideal interventions.
#4 Download code for a “clone” helper function for cloning assignment
functions across worlds.
#5 It’s good security practice to inspect the downloaded code before
executing. Uncomment the “exec” calls to execute the downloaded
code.
Next, we’ll build the full parallel world model as a graphical
model. Our first step is to specify the exogenous variable
distributions.

9.2.1 Specifying the exogenous variables
We want to implement the model as an SCM, so we’ll create
exogenous variables with distributions that entail all the
random elements of the game. In other words, given the
outcomes of these random elements and the host’s and
player’s choices, the outcome of the game will be
deterministic.
Specifically, we’ll introduce two rolls of three-sided dice and
a coin flip. We’ll call the first die roll Car Door Die Roll; it
selects a door for placement of the car. The player rolls the
second die, a variable we’ll call 1st Choice Die Roll, to select
the player’s first door selection. Both dice rolls assign a 1/3
probability to each outcome. Next, we have a coin flip, which
we’ll just call Coin Flip, which I’ll explain shortly.

Listing 9.2 Model building: Specify distributions for exogenous variables
from pgmpy.factors.discrete.CPD import TabularCPD
p_door_with_car = TabularCPD(     #1
    variable='Car Door Die Roll',     #1
    variable_card=3,     #1
    values=[[1/3], [1/3], [1/3]],     #1
    state_names={'Car Door Die Roll': ['1st', '2nd', '3rd']}     #1
)     #1
p_player_first_choice = TabularCPD(    #2
    variable='1st Choice Die Roll',     #2
    variable_card=3,     #2
    values=[[1/3], [1/3], [1/3]],    #2
    state_names={'1st Choice Die Roll': ['1st', '2nd', '3rd']}    #2
)     #2
p_coin_flip = TabularCPD(        #3
    variable='Coin Flip',     #3
    variable_card=2,     #3
    values=[[.5], [.5]],     #3
    state_names={'Coin Flip': ['tails', 'heads']}     #3
)     #3
#1 Prior distribution on exogenous variable for the three-sided die roll
that selects which door gets the car
#2 Prior distribution on the exogenous variable for the three-sided die
roll that selects the player’s first choice of door
#3 Prior distribution on the exogenous variable for the coin flip. The
host flips a coin that determines which door the host chooses to reveal
as carless and whether the player chooses a stay or switch strategy.
Next, we’ll build assignment functions for our endogenous
variables.
9.2.2 Specifying the assignment functions for
the endogenous variables
Our endogenous variables will be Host Door Selection,
Strategy (whether taking a switch or stay strategy), 2nd
Choice (choosing door 1, 2, 3 based on one’s strategy), and
Win or Lose (the outcome of the game).
Our definition of the SCM in chapter 6 assumes a one-to-one
pairing between endogenous and exogenous variables—we
typically make that assumption of independent exogenous
variables because if we knew of a common cause, we’d

usually model it explicitly. Here, we’ll relax that assumption
and match each exogenous variable to two endogenous
variables:
1st Choice Die Roll will drive Host Door Selection and
2nd Choice
Coin Flip will drive Host Door Selection and Strategy
Car Door Die Roll will drive Host Door Selection and Win
or Lose
We’ll use this simplified approach of matching one
exogenous variable to two endogenous variables because it
will require less code. This shortcut works well in this case
because the exogenous variables precisely encode all the
exogenous random elements of the game—these elements
completely determine the game’s outcome. We could use
the traditional formulation (where each endogenous variable
has a unique exogenous variable) and get the same results.
Let’s walk through the steps of the game and then construct
the DAG.
STRATEGY
The player will use Coin Flip as the basis of their Strategy
decision—if the host flips heads, the player will adopt a
switch door strategy. Otherwise, they’ll adopt a strategy of
keeping their original choice.
Listing 9.3 Create the assignment function for Strategy
f_strategy = TabularCPD(    
    variable='Strategy',    
    variable_card=2,    
    values=[[1, 0], [0, 1]],    
    evidence=['Coin Flip'],    
    evidence_card=[2],    
    state_names={    
        'Strategy': ['stay', 'switch'],    
        'Coin Flip': ['tails', 'heads']}    
)

HOST DOOR SELECTION
Host Door Selection depends on which door has the car (Car
Door Die Roll) and the player’s initial choice of door (1st
Choice Die Roll). The host will use Coin Flip to select a door
from two available doors in the event that the winning door
and the first choice door are the same. If Coin Flip is heads,
they’ll choose the right-most door, otherwise the left-most.
Listing 9.4 Create the assignment function for Host Door Selection
f_host_door_selection = TabularCPD(    
    variable='Host Door Selection',    
    variable_card=3,    
    values=[    
        [0,0,0,0,1,1,0,1,1,0,0,0,0,0,1,0,1,0],    
        [1,0,1,0,0,0,1,0,0,0,0,1,0,0,0,1,0,1],    
        [0,1,0,1,0,0,0,0,0,1,1,0,1,1,0,0,0,0]    
    ],    
    evidence=['Coin Flip',    
              'Car Door Die Roll',    
              '1st Choice Die Roll'],    
    evidence_card=[2, 3, 3],    
    state_names={    
        'Host Door Selection':['1st', '2nd', '3rd'],    
        'Coin Flip': ['tails', 'heads'],    
        'Car Door Die Roll': ['1st', '2nd', '3rd'],    
        '1st Choice Die Roll': ['1st', '2nd', '3rd']    
    }    
)
2ND CHOICE
2nd Choice, the player’s choice of which door to pick in the
second round, depends on Strategy, Host Door Selection (the
player can’t switch to the door the host opened), and 1st
Choice Die Roll (the player must stay with or switch from the
door selected in the first round).

Listing 9.5 Create an assignment function for 2nd Choice
f_second_choice = TabularCPD(    
    variable='2nd Choice',    
    variable_card=3,    
    values=[    
        [1,0,0,1,0,0,1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,1,0,1,0],    
        [0,1,0,0,1,0,0,1,0,1,0,1,0,1,0,1,0,1],    
        [0,0,1,0,0,1,0,0,1,0,1,0,1,0,0,0,0,0]    
    ],    
    evidence=['Strategy', 'Host Door Selection',    
              '1st Choice Die Roll'],    
    evidence_card=[2, 3, 3],    
    state_names={    
        '2nd Choice': ['1st', '2nd', '3rd'],    
        'Strategy': ['stay', 'switch'],    
        'Host Door Selection': ['1st', '2nd', '3rd'],    
        '1st Choice Die Roll': ['1st', '2nd', '3rd']    
    }    
)
WIN OR LOSE
Win or Lose depends on which door the player picked in 2nd
Choice and whether that door is the winning door (Car Door
Die Roll).
Listing 9.6 Create an assignment function for Win or Lose
f_win_or_lose = TabularCPD(    
    variable='Win or Lose',    
    variable_card=2,    
    values=[    
        [1,0,0,0,1,0,0,0,1],    
        [0,1,1,1,0,1,1,1,0],    
    ],  
    evidence=['2nd Choice', 'Car Door Die Roll'],    
    evidence_card=[3, 3],    
    state_names={  
        'Win or Lose': ['win', 'lose'],    
        '2nd Choice': ['1st', '2nd', '3rd'],    
        'Car Door Die Roll': ['1st', '2nd', '3rd']  
    }    
)
With the exogenous variable distributions and the
assignment functions complete, we can build the full parallel
world graphical model.

9.2.3 Building the parallel world graphical
model
We can now begin building the full parallel world model. First
we’ll add the edges that are in the graph.
Listing 9.7 Build the parallel world graphical model
exogenous_vars = ["Car Door Die Roll",    #1
                  "Coin Flip",    #1
                  "1st Choice Die Roll"]   #1
endogenous_vars = ["Host Door Selection",    #1
                   "Strategy",    #1
                   "2nd Choice", "Win or Lose"]   #1
actual_world_edges = [     #2
    ('Coin Flip', 'Host Door Selection'),     #2
    ('Coin Flip', 'Strategy'),    #2
    ('Car Door Die Roll', 'Host Door Selection'),   #2
    ('1st Choice Die Roll', 'Host Door Selection'),     #2
    ('1st Choice Die Roll', '2nd Choice'),     #2
    ('Host Door Selection', '2nd Choice'),     #2
    ('Strategy', '2nd Choice'),     #2
    ('2nd Choice', 'Win or Lose'),     #2
    ('Car Door Die Roll', 'Win or Lose')     #2
]     #2
possible_world_edges = [     #3
    (a + " Hyp" if a in endogenous_vars else a,     #3
     b + " Hyp" if b in endogenous_vars else b)     #3
    for a, b in actual_world_edges     #3
]     #3
#1 Specify lists of the exogenous and endogenous variables in the
causal DAG.
#2 Specify the edges of the SCM.
#3 Clone the edges for the hypothetical world.
Next, we’ll compile and plot the graph.

Listing 9.8 Compiling and visualizing the parallel world graph
from pgmpy.models import BayesianNetwork
twin_world_graph = BayesianNetwork(     #1
    actual_world_edges +     #1
    possible_world_edges     #1
)   #1
twin_world_graph.add_cpds(    #2
    p_door_with_car,    #3
    p_player_first_choice,     #3
    p_coin_flip,     #3
    f_strategy,     #4
    f_host_door_selection,    #4
    f_second_choice,   #4
    f_win_or_lose, #4
    clone(f_strategy),   #5
    clone(f_host_door_selection),     #5
    clone(f_second_choice),    #5
    clone(f_win_or_lose),     #5
) 
plot_graph(twin_world_graph)
#1 Create the parallel world graph.
#2 Plot the parallel world graph.
#3 Add probability distributions on exogenous variables.
#4 Add assignment functions from the SCM.
#5 Clone the assignment functions.
The preceding code prints the parallel world graph in figure
9.8.

Figure 9.8 The full parallel world graph for our counterfactual question.
Hypothetical world variables have the suffix “Hyp.”
Before we answer our counterfactual questions, we’ll do a
quick sanity check to confirm that our model can generate
the result that the switching strategy leads to a win two-
thirds of the time.
Listing 9.9 Confirm correct probability of winning given a switch
strategy
from pgmpy.inference import VariableElimination    #1
infer = VariableElimination(twin_world_graph)   #1
strategy_outcome = infer.query(    #2
    ['Win or Lose'],    #2
    evidence={"Strategy": "switch"}    #2
)   #2
print(strategy_outcome)
#1 Instantiate the inference algorithm with variable elimination.
#2 Infer the probability distribution of “Win or Lose” given that the
player uses a switch strategy.
This prints the following table.

+-------------------+--------------------+
| Win or Lose       |   phi(Win or Lose) |
+===================+====================+
| Win or Lose(win)  |             0.6667 |
+-------------------+--------------------+
| Win or Lose(lose) |             0.3333 |
+-------------------+--------------------+
As we expect, we win two-thirds of the time when we adopt a
strategy of switching doors.
9.2.4 Running the counterfactual inference
algorithm
Finally, we’ll use inference to answer our counterfactual
questions:
For a player who stayed with their first door and lost,
what is the probability that they would have won if they
switched doors?
For a player who lost, what is the probability that they
would have won if they switched doors?
Again, we use variable elimination as our choice of inference
algorithm. We’ll use the do function to do the action step and
implement the hypothetical condition of switching. Then
we’ll use the VariableElimination inference algorithm to do the
abduction and prediction steps all in one go.

Listing 9.10 Infer the counterfactual distributions
cf_model = do(twin_world_graph, {'Strategy Hyp': 'switch'})     #1
infer = VariableElimination(cf_model)    #2
cf_dist1 = infer.query(     #3
    ['Win or Lose Hyp'],    #3
    evidence={'Strategy': 'stay', 'Win or Lose': 'lose'}    #3
)   
print(cf_dist1)
cf_dist2 = infer.query(    #4
    ['Win or Lose Hyp'],    #4
    evidence={'Win or Lose': 'lose'}    #4
)   
print(cf_dist2)
#1 Action step: Set “Strategy Hyp” to “switch” using “do”, an
implementation of an ideal intervention.
#2 Apply variable elimination as our inference algorithm on the parallel
world graph.
#3 This inference query answers “For a player who used the stay
strategy and lost, would they have won if they used the switch
strategy?” Conditional on “Strategy == stay” and “Win or Lose ==
lose,” we infer the probability distribution of “Win or Lose Hyp” on the
parallel world graph.
#4 This inference query answers “For a player who lost, would they
have won if they used the switch strategy?” Conditional on “Win or Lose
== lose,” we infer the probability distribution of “Win or Lose Hyp” on
the parallel world graph.
For the question “For a player who stayed with their first
door and lost, what is the probability that they would have
won if they switched doors?” we have the following
probability table:
+-----------------------+------------------------+
| Win or Lose Hyp       |   phi(Win or Lose Hyp) |
+=======================+========================+
| Win or Lose Hyp(win)  |                 1.0000 |
+-----------------------+------------------------+
| Win or Lose Hyp(lose) |                 0.0000 |
+-----------------------+------------------------+
The result of the first question is obvious. If the player lost on
a stay strategy, their first choice did not have the car.
Therefore, one of the other two doors must have had the car.
Of those two, the host would have had to open the one
without the car. The remaining door would then have had the

car. That is the only door the player could switch to on a
switch strategy. So, conditional on losing with a stay
strategy, the chances they would have won with a switch
strategy are 100%.
For the question “For a player who lost, what is the
probability that they would have won if they switched
doors?” we have the following probability table:
+-----------------------+------------------------+
| Win or Lose Hyp       |   phi(Win or Lose Hyp) |
+=======================+========================+
| Win or Lose Hyp(win)  |                 0.6667 |
+-----------------------+------------------------+
| Win or Lose Hyp(lose) |                 0.3333 |
+-----------------------+------------------------+
The answer to the second question extends from the first.
We know from the original results of the model that if a
player lost, there is a 2/3 chance they used a stay strategy.
As we saw from the first question, in this case, flipping to a
switch strategy has a 100% chance of winning. There is a 1/3
chance it was a stay strategy, in which case, by the
consistency rule, there is 100% chance of losing.
Using pgmpy’s graphical model inference algorithms enables
counterfactual reasoning for discrete variable problems like
the Monty Hall problem. In the next case study, we will solve
the abduction step with variational inference, which
generalizes to a broader class of problems and leverages
modern deep learning.
9.3 Case study 2: Counterfactual
variational inference
In this next case study, we’ll implement the counterfactual
inference algorithm using a generative model in the PyTorch-
based probabilistic modeling library Pyro. Here we’ll focus on

the example of a forensic SCM where femur length is a cause
of human height (discussed earlier in section 6.1).
In the Monty Hall example, all the variables were discrete,
and the exogenous causes completely captured the game’s
random elements. That allowed us to implement the SCM
(albeit awkwardly) using TabularCPD for assignment functions
in pgmpy, and then explicitly create a parallel world
graphical model. Once that was accomplished, the graphical
modeling inference algorithm VariableElimination handled the
abduction and prediction steps for us.
In contrast, our second case study presents an approach that
generalizes to more types of problems. We’ll use the
PyTorch-based deep probabilistic modeling library Pyro. We’ll
handle the abduction step using variational inference, a
popular inference algorithm in the deep learning era.
In this example, we’ll use this modeling approach to contrast
two questions:
A conditional hypothetical: “What would an individual’s
height be if their femur length was 46 cm?” P(HF=46)
A parallel-world counterfactual: “An individual’s femur is
44 cm, and their height is 165 cm. What would their
height be if femur length was 46 cm?” P(HF=46|F=44,
H=165)
In both cases, we infer a distribution on HF=46 (where H is
height and F is femur length), but in the counterfactual case,
we condition on having observed F=44 and H=165.
Implementing code that contrasts these two distributions on
HF=46 will help us understand what makes counterfactual
queries unique.

9.3.1 Building the model
To make things more interesting, we’ll modify the model by
adding a variable for biological sex, which drives both femur
length and height. Figure 9.9 illustrates the new causal DAG.
Notice that our questions do not mention anything about
sex, so we’ll expect to see sex-related variance in our
distributions P(HF=46) and P(HF=46|F=44, H=165).
Figure 9.9 The causal DAG for the relationship between femur length
and height. Both are driven by biological sex.
The following code below implements the model in Pyro.
Note the creation and use of a PseudoDelta distribution
function. Endogenous variables are deterministic functions of
the exogenous variables, but for variational inference to
work, we must assign the endogenous variables a
distribution using pyro.sample. We could use the Dirac delta
distribution, which would assign all probability value to the
output of a variable’s assignment function. But gradient-
based optimization won’t work in this case. Instead, we’ll

approximate inference with a “pseudo-delta” distribution—a
normal distribution with a very small scale parameter.
Listing 9.11 Implement the femur SCM in Pyro
from torch import tensor
from pyro.distributions import Bernoulli, Normal
from pyro import sample
from functools import partial    #1
PseudoDelta = partial(Normal, scale=.01)   #1
def f_sex(N_sex):    #2
    return sample("sex", Bernoulli(N_sex))    #2
def f_femur(sex, N_femur):     #3
    if sex == tensor(1.0):     #3
        μ = 43.7 + 2.3 * N_femur     #3
    else:     #3
        μ = 40.238 + 1.9 * N_femur    #3
    return sample("femur", PseudoDelta(μ))     #3
def f_height(femur, sex, N_height):     #4
    if sex == tensor(1.0):     #4
        μ = 61.41 + 2.21 * femur + 7.62 * N_height     #4
    else:  #4
        μ = 54.1 + 2.47 * femur + 7 * N_height    #4
    return sample("height", PseudoDelta(μ))    #4
def model(exogenous):
    N_sex = sample("N_sex", exogenous['N_sex'])    #5
    N_femur = sample("N_femur", exogenous['N_femur'])    #5
    N_height = sample("N_height", exogenous['N_height'])     #5
    sex = f_sex(N_sex)    #6
    femur = f_femur(sex, N_femur)   #6
    height = f_height(femur, sex, N_height)    #6
    return sex, femur, height
exogenous = {    #7
    'N_sex': Bernoulli(.5),    #7
    'N_femur': Normal(0., 1.),     #7
    'N_height': Normal(0., 1.),    #7
}   #7
#1 Enable approximate inference with a “pseudo-delta” distribution to
emulate a deterministic delta distribution.
#2 The assignment function for biological sex
#3 The assignment function for femur length in cm. The assignment
uses two linear functions, one for each sex.
#4 The assignment function for height. Again, it uses two linear
functions, one for each sex.
#5 Sample from the exogenous variable prior distributions
#6 Obtain the endogenous variables given the exogenous variables.
#7 Specify the prior distributions for the exogenous variables.

Again, there are three steps to our counterfactual inference
algorithm:
1. Abduction
2. Action
3. Prediction
Unlike our pgmpy model, we won’t need to clone all the
variables for the parallel world. We’ll just use the
intervention operator pyro.do to apply the intervention and
get an intervention model. For P (HF = 46), we’ll generate from
the intervention model based on samples from P (NSex,
NFemur, NHeight ). For the counterfactual distribution, we’ll do
the abduction step using a variational inference algorithm to
learn P (NSex, NFemur, NHeight|F=44, H=165). Then we’ll
generate from the intervention model again, but this time
based on samples from P (NSex, NFemur, NHeight |F = 44, H = 
165).

DEALING WITH INTRACTABLE LIKELIHOODS
We use variational inference to do the abduction step,
inferring the exogenous variables given observed
endogenous variables. Variational inference is a likelihood-
based technique. Typically, we get likelihoods by sampling
from a distribution and then getting the probability value
for that sampled value using the distribution’s probability
mass/density function. But we can’t do that for SCMs
because endogenous variable values are set by the
assignment functions rather than being sampled. The code
in this forensic example uses sampling from a “pseudo”-
Dirac delta distribution, meaning a normal distribution with
a very small scale parameter. This approach, which
provides likelihood values from a normal distribution, falls
into a class of methods called approximate Bayesian
computation, and it shares some of the trade-offs with
other members of that class.
One alternative is to use amortized inference. In this
method, you sample many exogenous variable values and
use these to calculate many endogenous variable values.
Finally, you use these samples to train a model that
predicts the exogenous variable value, given the
endogenous variable value. You then use this trained
model during the abduction step.
Dealing with intractable likelihoods is a broader challenge
in probabilistic machine learning, which is beyond the
scope of this book. See the chapter notes at
https://www.altdeep.ai/p/causalaibook for links to
additional references and resources.

9.3.2 Implementing an intervention with
pyro.do
Now let’s pose the conditional hypothetical, “What would
height be if femur length was 46 cm?” Figure 9.10 illustrates
the modified DAG representing the ideal intervention that
sets femur length to 46.
Figure 9.10 We represent the hypothetical condition with an ideal
intervention and graph surgery on the causal DAG.
In Pyro, we’ll apply pyro.do to the original model and get an
intervention model. We’ll then repeatedly call the algorithm
with the prior on the exogenous variable distribution and
return generated endogenous values. We’ll repeat this
several times and visualize the intervention distribution on
height with a histogram.

Listing 9.12 Sampling from the intervention distribution of “if femur
length were 46cm”
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import pyro
int_model = pyro.do(model, data={"femur": tensor(46.0)})    #1
int_samples = []     #2
for _ in range(10000):   #2
    _, _, int_height = int_model(exogenous)     #2
    int_samples.append(float(int_height))    #2
plt.hist(     #3
    int_samples,     #3
    bins=20,    #3
    alpha=0.5,   #3
    label="Intervention Samples",    #3
    density=True     #3
)    #3
plt.ylim(0., .35)    #3
plt.legend()  #3
plt.xlabel("Height")    #3
plt.show()    #3
#1 Implement the hypothetical condition “...if femur length were 46
cm” with pyro.do, which returns a new model that implements the
intervention.
#2 Sample from the intervention distribution.
#3 Visualize the intervention distribution with a histogram of samples.
Figure 9.11 shows the resulting histogram of samples from
P(HF=46). We’ll contrast this with the histogram from
P(HF=46|F=44, H=165).


Figure 9.11 This histogram of samples visualizes the interventional
distribution—the x-axis corresponds to different ranges of height
values, and the y-axis is proportions of the sampled heights that fall
within each range.
Now we’ll do the counterfactual inference.
9.3.3 Implementing the abduction step with
variational inference
Figure 9.12 The parallel world graph for the femur length counterfactual
Our conditional hypothetical question was, “What would an
individual’s height be if their femur length was 46 cm?” Now
we want to answer the counterfactual: “An individual’s femur
is 44 cm, and their height is 165 cm. What would their height
be if their femur length was 46 cm?” In other words, we want
to extend P (HF = 46) to P (HF = 46 |F=44, H=165). Figure 9.12
illustrates the corresponding parallel world graph.

Following the counterfactual inference algorithm, we need to
do the abduction step and infer P (NSex , NFemur , NHeight |F = 
44, H = 165). We’ll use variational inference, where we’ll
specify a guide function—a function with trainable
parameters representing a distribution Q(NSex , NFemur ,
NHeight ). The training procedure optimizes the parameters of
the guide such that Q(NSex, NFemur, NHeight) closely
approximates P (NSex, NFemur, NHeight |F = 44, H = 165).
REFRESHER: PROPOSAL DISTRIBUTIONS AND PYRO’S GUIDE
FUNCTION
Pyro’s use of “guide functions” enables the developer to
write their own proposal distributions that “propose”
values for variables in the target distributions. Sampling-
based inference algorithms (e.g., importance sampling or
MCMC) use the proposal to generate samples and then
operate on the samples so they represent the target
distribution. Variational inference optimizes the
parameters of the proposal distribution such that it
becomes close to (or “approximates”) the target
distribution. In contrast to pgmpy’s automatic inference
algorithms, guide functions let the developer “guide”
inference as they see fit.

Listing 9.13 Specifying the guide function for variational inference
import torch.distributions.constraints as constraints
from pyro.primitives import param
from pyro.distributions import Delta
def guide(exogenous):   #1
    p = param("p", tensor(.5),     #2
              constraint=constraints.unit_interval)   #2
    n_sex = sample("N_sex", Bernoulli(p))   #2
    sex = sample("sex", Bernoulli(n_sex))    #3
    n_femur_loc = param("n_femur_loc", tensor(0.0))     #4
    n_femur_scale = param(     #4
        "n_femur_scale",    #4
        tensor(1.0),     #4
        constraint=constraints.positive    #4
    )     #4
    femur_dist = Normal(n_femur_loc, n_femur_scale)    #5
    n_femur = sample("N_femur", femur_dist)     #5
    n_height_loc = param("n_height_loc", tensor(0.0))    #5
    n_height_scale = param(    #5
        "n_height_scale",   #5
        tensor(1.0),     #5
        constraint=constraints.positive    #5
    )     #5
    height_dist =  Normal(n_height_loc, n_height_scale) #5
    n_height = sample("N_height", height_dist)     #5
    femur = sample("femur", Delta(n_femur))     #6
    height = sample("height", Delta(n_height))     #6
#1 The exogenous prior distribution is passed to the guide function. The
function won’t use this argument, but the signatures of the guide and
the model functions must match.
#2 The guide function tries to approximate P(N_sex|femur, height) from
a Bernoulli distribution. Optimization targets the parameter of this
Bernoulli distribution.
#3 n_sex is either 0 or 1. When passed as a parameter to a Bernoulli,
the outcome is deterministic.
#4 The guide function tries to approximate P(N_femur|femur, height)
from a normal distribution. Optimization targets the location and scale
parameters of this normal distribution.
#5 The guide function tries to approximate P(N_height|femur, height),
also from a normal distribution.
#6 Since we condition on femur and height, they are not needed in the
guide function. But it is useful to have them in case we want to
condition on different outcomes in a new analysis.

DETERMINISTIC ABDUCTION
A special case of the abduction step is when both of the
following are true:
1. You observe all the endogenous variables.
2. The SCM assignment functions are invertible.
In that case, given observations of all the endogenous
variables, you can calculate exact point values for the
exogenous variables with the inverted assignment
functions. Consequently, you apply the assignment
functions in the hypothetical world to get point values of
the hypothetical outcomes. However, most practical
examples fall in the following general case:
1. You only condition on some endogenous variables.
2. The SCM assignment functions are not invertible.
In our abduction step, we first condition the model on
observed values of femur and height.
Listing 9.14 Conditioning on actual values of femur and height
conditioned_model = pyro.condition(    
    model,    
    data={"femur": tensor(44.0), "height": tensor(165.0)}    
)
Next, we infer the exogenous variable, given femur and
height, using variational inference.

Listing 9.15 Implementing the abduction step with variational inference
from pyro.infer import SVI, Trace_ELBO
from pyro.optim import Adam
pyro.util.set_rng_seed(123)    #1
pyro.clear_param_store()     #2
svi = SVI(     #3
          model=conditioned_model,
          guide=guide,
          optim=Adam({"lr": 0.003}),    #4
          loss=Trace_ELBO()     #5
)
losses = []    #6
num_steps = 5000     #7
for t in range(num_steps):    #7
    losses.append(svi.step(exogenous))    #7
plt.plot(losses)     #8
plt.title("Loss During Training")    #8
plt.xlabel("step")    #8
plt.ylabel("loss")     #8
#1 Set a seed for reproducibility.
#2 Clear any current parameter values.
#3 Initialize the stochastic variational inference algorithm.
#4 Optimize the parameters with a learning rate of .003.
#5 Use (negative) evidence lower bound (ELBO) as the loss function.
#6 Initialize a list to store loss values for plotting.
#7 Run the optimization for 5,000 steps. The SVI’s step object has the
same signature as the model and the guide, so any model/guide
arguments must be passed in here.
#8 Plot the loss during training.
Figure 9.13 shows loss during training indicating variational
inference converged.


Figure 9.13 Loss during optimization of the parameters of the
distribution approximating P(NSex, NFemur, NHeight|F=44, H=165)
After training is completed, we extract the optimized
parameters for our updated exogenous variable distribution.
Listing 9.16 Extract parameters of updated exogenous distribution
n_sex_p = param("p").item()     #1
n_femur_loc = param("n_femur_loc").item()   #1
n_femur_scale = param("n_femur_scale").item()   #1
n_height_loc = param("n_height_loc").item()   #1
n_height_scale = param("n_height_scale").item()  #1
exogenous_posterior = {    #2
    'N_sex': Bernoulli(n_sex_p),   #2
    'N_femur': Normal(n_femur_loc, n_femur_scale),   #2
    'N_height': Normal(n_height_loc, n_height_scale),     #2
}     #2
#1 Extract the parameter values.
#2 Do the abduction by using the optimized parameters to create new
“posterior” exogenous variable distributions.
One thing to note is that while we typically specify
independent prior distributions for exogenous variables in an
SCM, exogenous variables are generally conditionally
dependent given endogenous variables (because of collider
paths!). However, I wrote a guide function that samples the
exogenous variables independently, ignoring this conditional
dependence. Writing a guide that treats dependent variables
as independent is convenient and is common practice, but
doing so will add some bias to the results. You can avoid this
by doing the extra work of writing a guide function that
maintains the dependencies implied by the graph.

COUNTERFACTUAL MODELING WITH CHIRHO
ChiRho is a causal extension of Pyro that seeks to more
seamlessly blend the probabilistic modeling approach of
Pyro with causal inference. ChiRho has parallel world
abstractions and abstractions for implementing
counterfactual inference with normalizing flows and the
variational inference approach discussed in this example.
As an extension to Pyro, the modeling techniques
discussed in this case study will also work with ChiRho.
9.3.4 Implementing the action and prediction
steps
In the Monty Hall example, we built the parallel world model
explicitly. In this example, we can just perform the action
step by using pyro.do to get the hypothetical world model,
and sample from this model using the updated exogenous
variable distribution.
We’ll repeat the procedure of generating samples from the
intervention model that set femur length to 46 cm. Recall
that we already created the intervention model in listing 9.11
with this line:
int_model = pyro.do(model, data={"femur": tensor(46.0)})
To sample from the intervention distribution, we called
int_model on our original exogenous variable distribution. Now,
for the prediction step, we’ll call it again, this time with
exogenous_posterior instead of exogenous, because
exogenous_posterior encodes all the information from the
actual world.

Listing 9.17 Sampling from the counterfactual distribution
cf_samples = []    
for _ in range(10000):    
    _, _, cf_height = int_model(exogenous_posterior)    
    cf_samples.append(float(cf_height))
Finally, we overlay a histogram of samples from the
counterfactual distribution against the interventional
distribution histogram in figure 9.14, and we can see the
clear differences between these distributions.
Listing 
9.18 
Comparing 
the 
interventional 
and 
counterfactual
distributions
plt.hist(    
    int_samples,    
    bins=20,    
    alpha=0.5,    
    label="Intervention Samples",    
    density=True    
)
plt.hist(    
    cf_samples,   
    bins=20,    
    alpha=0.5,    
    label="Counterfactual Samples", 
    density=True    
)  
plt.ylim(0., .35)    
plt.legend()    
plt.xlabel("Height")    
plt.show()
The resulting plot, shown in figure 9.14, contrasts histograms
of the interventional and counterfactual samples.


Figure 9.14 Histograms of generated samples from the interventional
and counter-factual distributions encoded by the causal model
Figure 9.14 illustrates how the counterfactual distribution
generally has much less spread than an interventional
distribution representing the same hypothetical conditions.
The counterfactual distribution essentially filters the
interventional distribution down to cases where the
conditions observed in the actual world are true. In this case,
we have two height bell curves corresponding to two sexes.
Those bell curves have a stronger overlap in the
interventional distribution.
In a final example, we’ll evaluate how to run the
counterfactual inference algorithm in the context of a
generative AI image model.
9.4 Case study 3: Counterfactual
image generation with a deep
generative model
In generative AI, the user provides an input, and the
algorithm generates some output. For example, suppose I
wanted to write a script for an alternative history where
Harriet Tubman was a pirate captain. I turned to a generative
image model for some concept art, posing the text question,
“What would Harriet Tubman look like as a pirate captain?”
The model generated the image in figure 9.15.

Figure 9.15 The output of a generative AI image model, given the
natural language input prompt “What would Harriet Tubman look like as
a pirate captain?”

The question itself is a counterfactual—Harriet Tubman was
not a pirate. We’ll explore natural language counterfactuals
with large language models in chapter 13. Here, we’ll reason
counterfactually about the image in figure 9.15.
Suppose I like this image, but I want to make an edit—I want
to change this image to remove the glasses. One way of
doing this is to use a tool like “in-fill,” where I select the
pixels with the glasses and indicate that I want whatever is
in the pixels to go away. This would be directly editing the
form of the image.
An alternative approach would be semantic editing, where
rather than manipulating the pixels in the image, I
manipulate some latent representation of the image
corresponding to “glasses.” In effect, I pose the
counterfactual question, “what would this image look like if
the subject were not wearing glasses?” Figure 9.16 contrasts
the original and “counterfactual” versions of the image.

Figure 9.16 Given the generated image on the left, the user might
prompt the generative AI with the counterfactual question, “What
would this image look like without the glasses?” They would expect
something like the image on the right, where conceptual elements of
the image not causally downstream of glasses removal should be
unaffected.
This is an attractive use case, as manipulating underlying
concepts is often preferable to manipulating form, especially
when the edits you want to make aren’t all located in the
same specific area of pixels. This is especially attractive if
our conceptual model is a causal model, so the downstream
causal consequences of changing a concept are reflected in
the image, while the law of consistency prevents change in

the parts of the image that should be unaffected by the
change in concept.
With this use case in mind, this section will use our
counterfactual algorithm to implement a form of semantic
editing. We’ll start with the actual image. In the abduction
step, we’ll infer some latent representation of the image. In
the action step, we’ll propose the desired edit, and in the
prediction step, we’ll generate the new image.
In this example, we’ll use an SCM built with a variational
autoencoder in PyTorch. We’ll also use a simple dataset
called dSprites for proof of concept. The dSprites data
demonstrates the idea and is simple enough to train a model
quickly on an ordinary laptop. See the chapter notes at
https://www.altdeep.ai/p/causalaibook for references with
more practical counterfactual image modeling examples.
9.4.1 The dSprites data
The dSprites dataset consists of 2D shapes, each rendered in
8 possible positions, 6 possible scales, and 40 possible
rotations. The shapes are composed of 5 independent
factors: shape, scale, rotation, x-position, and y-position.
Figure 9.17 demonstrates samples from the dataset.

Figure 9.17 The dSprites data features images causally determined by
five independent causal factors: shape, scale, rotation, x-position, and
y-position.
We’ll treat each of these factors as causes of an image
variable, as illustrated in the causal DAG in figure 9.18.

Figure 9.18 The causal DAG for a dSprites image, displayed as a plate
model to highlight the shape of NI and I. Ni is the exogenous variable
for the image. The model is trained with an encoder-decoder framework
that uses a 50 × 1 dimensional image encoding to represent NI.
In the following code, we load a specific image from the
dSprites dataset.

Listing 9.19 Load a dSprites image
import torch
from matplotlib import pyplot as plt
import io   #1
import urllib.request    #1
import numpy as np     #1
url = ('https://github.com/altdeep/causalML/blob/master/'    #1
       'book/chapter%209/sprites_example.npz?raw=true')    #1
with urllib.request.urlopen(url) as response:    #1
    data = response.read()    #1
file = io.BytesIO(data)    #1
npzfile = np.load(file)    #1
img_dict = dict(npzfile)     #1
img = torch.tensor(img_dict['image'].astype(np.float32) )    #2
plt.imshow(img, cmap='Greys_r', interpolation='nearest')     #2
plt.axis('off')  #2
plt.title('original')     #2
plt.show()    #2
causal_factor = torch.from_numpy(img_dict['label']).unsqueeze(0)     #3
print(causal_factor)     #3
#1 Download dSprites example from GitHub and load it.
#2 Plot the dSprites image.
#3 The causal factors of the example are [0 0 1 13 26 14], the first
element is always 0, and the second element corresponds to “square”
and is represented by 0. The remaining elements correspond to scale,
orientation, and X and Y positions.
This plots the image in figure 9.19.

Figure 9.19 A single example from the dSprites data
Printing causal_factor produces tensor ([[ 0, 0, 1, 13, 26,
14]]). The first element is 0 for all examples in the data. The
second element of the causal factor vector corresponds to
shape. Square, ellipse, and heart are represented by 0, 1,
and 2, respectively. The image contains a square (P  =  0)
with scale S = 1, orientation O=13, and position X = 26 and Y 
= 14.

In this case study, we’ll ask, “What would this image look like
if the shape were a heart instead of a square?” This suggests
the parallel-world network in figure 9.20.
Figure 9.20 The parallel world graph implied by the question “Given the
image, what would it look like if the shape were a heart?”
First, we’ll load a pretrained encoder to map from the image
to the exogenous variable for the causal factors. In this
simple model, we’ll assume the assignment functions for the
exogenous variables of the causal factors are identity
functions, i.e., the causal factors and their exogenous
variables will have the same values. Let’s start by initializing
the encoder.

Listing 9.20 Load the encoder of causal factors
import requests
import torch.nn as nn
CARDINALITY = [1, 3, 6, 40, 32, 32]    #1
class EncoderCausalFactors(nn.Module):     #2
    def __init__(self, image_dim, factor_dim):
        super(EncoderCausalFactors, self).__init__()
        self.image_dim = image_dim
        self.factor_dim = factor_dim
        hidden_dim = 1000     #3
        self.fc1 = nn.Linear(image_dim, hidden_dim)    #4
        self.fc2 = nn.Linear(hidden_dim, hidden_dim)   #4
        self.fc3 = nn.Linear(hidden_dim, factor_dim)    #4
        self.softplus = nn.Softplus()  #4
        self.sigmoid = nn.Sigmoid()     #5
    def forward(self, img):
        img = img.reshape(-1, self.image_dim)    #6
        hidden1 = self.softplus(self.fc1(img))     #7
        hidden2 = self.softplus(self.fc2(hidden1))    #7
        p_loc = self.sigmoid(self.fc3(hidden2))     #8
        return p_loc    #8
encoder_n_causal_factors = EncoderCausalFactors( #9
    image_dim=64*64,   #9
    factor_dim=sum(CARDINALITY)   #9
)  #9
#1 Cardinality in each dimensionality of the causal factors
#2 Encoder for the vector of exogenous parents of the causal factors
#3 The hidden layers have a length of 1,000.
#4 Using linear transforms passed through Softplus activation functions
#5 The final activation is a sigmoid function.
#6 Flatten the image.
#7 Calculate the hidden layers.
#8 The output layer generates a probability vector that Is used as the
parameter of a OneHotCategorical distribution.
#9 Initialize the encoder. The image dimension is 64 × 64 pixels, and the
six elements of the causal factor vector are one-hot encoded into a
vector of length 1 + 3 + 6 + 40 + 32 + 32 = 114.
Next, we’ll download and load pretrained weights into this
encoder from the book’s GitHub repo.

Listing 9.21 Download and load pretrained weights into the encoder of
causal factors
url = ('https://github.com/altdeep/causalML/raw/master/'    
       'book/chapter%209/sprites-model-encoder-causal-factors.pt')    
response = requests.get(url)    
response.raise_for_status()    
with open('temp_weights.pt', 'wb') as f:    
    f.write(response.content)    
state_dict = torch.load(    
    'temp_weights.pt',    
    map_location=torch.device('cpu')    
)    
encoder_n_causal_factors.load_state_dict(state_dict)
First, we’ll test that the encoder can recover the causal
factors from the image.
Listing 9.22 Generate examples of causal exogenous factors
from pyro import distributions as dist
def decode_one_hot(factor_encoded, cardinality=CARDINALITY):  
    split = [   
        torch.split(element, cardinality)     #1
        for element in factor_encoded   #1
    ]   #1
    labels = [[int(torch.argmax(vec)) for vec in item]    #1
              for item in split]    #1
    return torch.tensor(labels)   #1
def sample_one_hot(p_encoded, cardinality=CARDINALITY):     #2
    split = [torch.split(element, cardinality)    #2
             for element in p_encoded]  #2
    sample_list = [   #2
        [     #2
            dist.OneHotCategorical(p_vec).sample()    #2
            for p_vec in item    #2
        ] for item in split  #2
    ]     #2
    sample = torch.stack([    #2
        torch.cat(samples, -1)     #2
        for samples in sample_list    #2
    ])    #2
    return sample     #2
inferred_cause_p = encoder_n_causal_factors.forward(img)     #3
sampled_factors = sample_one_hot(     #3
    inferred_cause_p   #3
)     #3
print(decode_one_hot(sampled_factors))     #3
#1 Helper function that decodes the one-hot encoded output of the
encoder
#2 Samples from the output probability vector of
encoder_causal_factors
#3 Use the encoder to predict causal factors.

Encoding the sampled image prints the causal factors: [ 0,
0, 1, 13, 26, 14]. The encoder accurately recovers the
causal factors from the image.
Next, we’ll initialize an encoder that we’ll use for inference of
NI, the exogenous variable for the image. This encoder takes
an image and an instance of the causal factor vector as an
input.
Listing 9.23 An encoder for inference of NI
class EncoderNImage(nn.Module):     #1
    def __init__(self, image_dim, factor_dim, n_image_dim):
        super(EncoderNImage, self).__init__()
        self.image_dim = image_dim
        self.factor_dim = factor_dim
        self.n_image_dim = n_image_dim
        hidden_dim = 1000
        self.fc1 = nn.Linear(
            self.image_dim + self.factor_dim, hidden_dim   #2
        )    #2
        self.fc2 = nn.Linear(hidden_dim, hidden_dim)     #2
        self.fc31 = nn.Linear(hidden_dim, n_image_dim)     #2
        self.fc32 = nn.Linear(hidden_dim, n_image_dim)     #2
        self.softplus = nn.Softplus()    #2
    def forward(self, img, factor):
        img = img.reshape(-1, self.image_dim)    #3
        inputs = torch.cat((img, factor), -1)    #4
        hidden1 = self.softplus(self.fc1(inputs))    #5
        hidden2 = self.softplus(self.fc2(hidden1))     #5
        n_image_loc = self.fc31(hidden2)     #6
        n_image_scale = torch.exp(self.fc32(hidden2))    #6
        return n_image_loc, n_image_scale    #6
encoder_n_image = EncoderNImage(     #7
    image_dim=64*64,    #7
    factor_dim=sum(CARDINALITY),     #7
    n_image_dim=50     #7
)     #7
#1 Encoder used for inference of N I, which serves as both the
exogenous variable for the image in causal terms, and the encoding of
the image in VAE terms
#2 Using linear transforms passed into a Softplus activation function
#3 Flatten the image.
#4 Concatenate the image and the causal factor vector.
#5 Calculate the hidden layers.
#6 Calculate the location and scale parameter of multivariate normal
distribution on N I.
#7 Initialize the encoder.

The encoder of the noise variable requires the causal factors
to be one-hot encoded, so we’ll create a helper function to
do just that.
Listing 9.24 Create a function for one-hot encoding
def encode_one_hot(factor, cardinality=CARDINALITY):    
    new_factor = []    
    for i, factor_length in enumerate(cardinality):    
        new_factor.append(    
            torch.nn.functional.one_hot(    
                factor[:,i].to(torch.int64), int(factor_length)    
            )    
        )    
    new_factor = torch.cat(new_factor, -1)    
    return new_factor.to(torch.float32)
Again, we’ll download and load pretrained weights for the
encoder.
Listing 9.25 Load pretrained weights for encoder for inference of NI
weight_url = ("https://github.com/altdeep/causalML/raw/master/"    #1
              "book/chapter%209/sprites-model-encoder-n-image.pt")   #1
response = requests.get(weight_url)   #1
response.raise_for_status()   #1
with open('temp_weights.pt', 'wb') as f:   #1
    f.write(response.content)   #1
state_dict = torch.load(  #1
    'temp_weights.pt',   #1
    map_location=torch.device('cpu')   #1
)    #1
encoder_n_image.load_state_dict(state_dict)    #1
n_image_loc, n_image_scale = encoder_n_image.forward(     #2
    img,    #2
    encode_one_hot(causal_factor)     #2
)    #2
n_image = torch.normal(n_image_loc, n_image_scale)    #3
#1 Load the pretrained weights.
#2 Pass the image and causal factors into the encoder, and obtain N I
location and scale parameters.
#3 Generate from the posterior distribution on N I.
Finally, we’ll load a decoder that maps from NI and a causal
factor back to an image. In causal terms, the decoder is part
of the assignment function for the image.

Listing 9.26 Load and initialize the decoder that maps causes and NI to
images
class Decoder(nn.Module):     #1
    def __init__(self, image_dim, factor_dim, n_image_dim):
        super(Decoder, self).__init__()
        hidden_dim = 1000
        self.fc1 = nn.Linear(n_image_dim + factor_dim, hidden_dim)     #2
        self.fc2 = nn.Linear(hidden_dim, hidden_dim)   #2
        self.fc3 = nn.Linear(hidden_dim, hidden_dim)   #2
        self.fc4 = nn.Linear(hidden_dim, image_dim)    #2
        self.softplus = nn.Softplus()    #2
        self.sigmoid = nn.Sigmoid()   #2
    def forward(self, n_image, factor):
        inputs = torch.cat((n_image, factor), -1)     #3
        hidden1 = self.softplus(self.fc1(inputs))     #4
        hidden2 = self.softplus(self.fc2(hidden1))     #4
        hidden3 = self.softplus(self.fc3(hidden2))     #4
        p_img = self.sigmoid(self.fc4(hidden3))     #5
        return p_img     #5
decoder = Decoder(     #6
    image_dim=64*64,    #6
    factor_dim=sum(CARDINALITY),   #6
    n_image_dim=50    #6
)     #6
#1 The decoder maps from causal factors and N_image to generate a
parameter for a multivariate Bernoulli distribution on images.
#2 The model uses linear transforms, a Softplus activate for hidden
layers, and sigmoid activate on the output layer.
#3 The network concatenates n_image and factors in the input layer.
#4 The input is passed through three hidden layers with Softplus
activation functions.
#5 The output is a probability parameter passed to a multivariate
Bernoulli distribution on image pixels.
#6 Initialize the encoder.
Again, we’ll download and load pretrained weights into the
decoder.
Listing 9.27 Download and load the decoder weights
dcdr_url = ("https://github.com/altdeep/causalML/raw/master/"    
       "book/chapter%209/sprites-model-decoder.pt")    
response = requests.get(dcdr_url)    
response.raise_for_status()    
with open('temp_weights.pt', 'wb') as f:    
    f.write(response.content)    
state_dict = torch.load(    
    'temp_weights.pt',    
    map_location=torch.device('cpu')    
)    
decoder.load_state_dict(state_dict)

Before we generate the counterfactual image, we’ll create a
helper function to plot it.
Listing 9.28 Helper function for plotting the counterfactual image
def compare_reconstruction(original, generated):    
    fig = plt.figure()    
    ax0 = fig.add_subplot(121)    
    plt.imshow(    
        original.cpu().reshape(64, 64),    
        cmap='Greys_r',    
        interpolation='nearest'    
    )    
    plt.axis('off')    
    plt.title('actual')    
    ax1 = fig.add_subplot(122)    
    plt.imshow(    
        generated.reshape(64, 64),    
        cmap='Greys_r', interpolation='nearest')    
    plt.axis('off')    
    plt.title('counterfactual')    
    plt.show()
Now, we’ll specify the SCM. We’ll write a p_n_image function
that generates from P(Nimage) and an f_image assignment
function for the image.

Listing 9.29 Create an exogenous distribution and assignment function
for the image
def p_n_image(n_image_params):    #1
    n_image_loc, n_image_scale, n_unif_upper = n_image_params     #2
    n_image_norm = dist.Normal(     #3
        n_image_loc, n_image_scale     #3
    ).to_event(1).sample()     #3
    n_image_unif = dist.Uniform(0, n_unif_upper).expand(     #4
        torch.Size([1, 64*64])    #4
    ).sample()    #4
    n_image = n_image_norm, n_image_unif    #5
    return n_image
def f_image(factor, n_image):    #6
    n_image_norm, n_image_unif = n_image     #7
    p_output = decoder.forward(     #8
        n_image_norm,     #8
        encode_one_hot(factor)     #8
    )
    sim_img = (n_image_unif <= p_output).int()     #9
    return sim_img
#1 A function that generates a variate from the N_image exogenous
distribution
#2 The parameters of N_image’s distribution include location and scale
parameters for a normal distribution and the upper bound of a uniform
distribution.
#3 Sample a normal random variate from the normal distribution.
#4 Sample a uniform random variate from a uniform distribution.
#5 Combine these into a single n_image object.
#6 Assignment function for the image
#7 The exogenous noise variable decomposes into one normal and one
uniform random variate.
#8 The normal random variate is passed through the decoder to get a
probability vector for the pixels.
#9 Each pixel is set deterministically with an indicator function that
returns 1 if an element of the uniform variate is less than the
corresponding element of the probability vector, or otherwise returns 0.
Finally, we can run through the steps of the counterfactual
inference algorithm to answer the question, “What would
this image look like if it was a heart?”

Listing 9.30 Generate a counterfactual image
def abduct(img, factor, smoother=1e-3):     #1
    n_image_loc, n_image_scale = encoder_n_image.forward(     #2
        img, encode_one_hot(factor)    #2
    )   #2
    n_unif_upper = decoder.forward(     #3
        n_image_loc,     #3
        encode_one_hot(factor)     #3
    )     #3
    n_unif_upper = n_unif_upper * (1 - 2 * smoother) + smoother     #3
    p_image_params = n_image_loc, n_image_scale, n_unif_upper     #4
    return p_image_params
def do_action(factor, element=1, val=2):     #5
    intervened_factor = factor.clone()   #5
    intervened_factor[0][element] = val    #5
    return intervened_factor     #5
def predict(intervened_factor, n_image_params):     #6
    n_image = p_n_image(n_image_params)    #6
    sim_img = f_image(intervened_factor, n_image)     #6
    return sim_img    #6
def counterfactual(img, factor):    #7
    p_image_params = abduct(img, factor)    #7
    intervened_factor = do_action(factor)   #7
    pred_recon = predict(intervened_factor, p_image_params)    #7
    compare_reconstruction(img, pred_recon)    #7
counterfactual(img, causal_factor)    #8
#1 Abduction step: infer the exogenous variable given the image.
#2 Infer the parameters of N_I. First, this includes two parameters of a
normal distribution.
#3 Second, we infer the upper bound of a uniform distribution and
apply smoothing so it is not exactly 1 or 0.
#4 Combine these together into one inferred parameter set.
#5 Action step: Apply the intervention that sets the shape element to
“heart” (represented by the integer 2).
#6 Prediction step: Generate n_image from P(N_image), and pass this
through an assignment function to generate an image.
#7 Apply all three steps: abduct the n_image, apply the intervention,
and forward generate the counterfactual image.
#8 Plot the result.
Figure 9.21 shows the results.

Figure 9.21 The original (left) and counterfactually generated image
(right)
This is a proof of concept—there is additional nuance in
counterfactual image generation. I’m cheating a bit with this
dSprites example. The counterfactual generation works
because the causal factors are independent and because the
data is quite simple. For counterfactual image generation to
work in general, we need to understand and satisfy certain
assumptions.
9.4.2 Assumptions needed for counterfactual
image generation
In the next chapter, we’ll tackle the problem of identification.
Identification is determining what causal questions we can
answer, given our modeling assumptions and the data
available to us. The counterfactual inference algorithm
assumes you have the ground-truth SCM. If you can make

that assumption, you can use the algorithm to answer any
counterfactual (or interventional) query.
In most cases, we can’t practicably assume we have the
ground-truth SCM. At best, you’ll have an SCM that acts as
an approximation of the ground truth. For example, the true
process that generated the dSprites images certainly didn’t
involve a decoder neural network—we used deep learning
with this decoder architecture to approximate that process.
As you’ll see in the next chapter, such learned
approximations are not guaranteed to produce
counterfactuals faithful to the ground-truth data generating
process.
But there is something special about the counterfactual
generation of images and other media modalities (e.g., text,
audio, video). In these cases, mathematical guarantees are
less critical when we can simply look (read, listen, etc.) at
the generated counterfactual media and evaluate whether it
aligns with what we imagine it should be. Does the image in
figure 9.21 look like what you imagined replacing the square
with a heart would look like? Does the image of pirate
captain Harriet Tubman without the spectacles align with
your expectations? If so, the tool is quite useful, even
without identification guarantees. Here, utility is in terms of
aligning with human counterfactual imagination rather than
ground-truth accuracy. I have the concept image of Captain
Tubman that I wanted, and I can move on to my next
creative task.
Summary
The counterfactual inference algorithm requires an SCM
and involves three steps: abduction, action, and
prediction.

In the abduction step, we infer the exogenous variables,
given observed endogenous variables.
In the action step, we use an ideal intervention to
implement 
the 
hypothetical 
condition 
in 
the
counterfactual query.
In the prediction step, we predict the hypothetical
outcomes given the hypothetical condition and the
distribution of the exogenous variables learned in the
abduction step.
We 
can 
implement 
the 
counterfactual 
inference
algorithm using different probabilistic machine learning
frameworks.
We can use a causal graphical modeling library like
pgmpy to directly implement a generative SCM on a
parallel world graph, and use graphical model inference
algorithms with graph surgery to infer the counterfactual
query.
We 
can 
use 
modern 
probabilistic 
deep 
learning
techniques such as variational inference and normalizing
flows to do the abduction step of the counterfactual
inference algorithm.
Deep generative models can often be modified to enable
counterfactual generation of media (text, images, audio,
video, etc.). While there may be identification questions,
you can typically examine the generated counterfactual
artifact and validate that it matches your expectations.

10 Identification and the
causal hierarchy
This chapter covers
Motivating examples for identification
Using y0 for identification and deriving estimands
How to derive counterfactual graphs in y0
Deriving 
SWIGs 
for 
graph-based 
counterfactual
identification
The practice of advancing machine learning often relies on a
blind confidence that more data and the right architecture
can solve any task. For tasks with causal elements, causal
identification can make that less of a matter of faith and
more of a science. It can tell us when more data won’t help,
and what types of inductive biases are needed for the
algorithm to work.
Causal identification is the task of determining when we can
make a causal inference from purely observational data or a
counterfactual inference from observational or experimental
data. In statistics and data science, it is the theory that
allows us to distill causation from correlation and estimate
causal effects in the presence of confounders. But causal
identification has applications in AI. For example, suppose a
deep learning algorithm achieves high performance on a
particular causal reasoning benchmark. The ideas behind
causal identification tell us that certain causal inductive
biases must be baked into the model architecture, training
data, training procedure, hyperparameters (e.g., prompts),
and/or benchmark data. By tracking down that causal

information, we can make sure the algorithm can
consistently achieve that benchmark performance in new
scenarios.
Identification is a theory-heavy part of causal inference.
Fortunately, we can rely on libraries to do the theoretical
heavy lifting for us and focus on skill-building with these
libraries. In this chapter, we’ll focus on a library called y0
(pronounced why-not), which implements algorithms for
identification using graphs. By the end of the chapter, we’ll
have demystified causal identification and you’ll know how
to apply y0’s identification algorithms.
10.1 The causal hierarchy
The causal hierarchy, also known as Pearl’s hierarchy or the
ladder of causation, is a three-level hierarchy over the types
of causal questions we ask, models we build, data we
acquire, and causal inferences we make.
The causal hierarchy consists of three levels:
1. Association
2. Intervention
3. Counterfactual
When we do a statistical or causal analysis, we are reasoning
at one of these three levels. When we know at what level we
are reasoning, we can determine what kind of assumptions
and data we need to rely on to do that reasoning correctly.
10.1.1 Where questions and queries fall on the
hierarchy
The questions we ask of our causal model, and the causal
queries we formalize from those questions, fall at different

levels of the hierarchy. First, level 1 (the association level) is
concerned with “What is…?” questions. Let’s illustrate with
the online gaming example, shown again in figure 10.1.
Figure 10.1 The DAG for the online gaming example
An example level 1 question and associated query is
“What are in-game purchase amounts for players highly
engaged in side-quests?” P ( I| E=“high”)
Reasoning at this level aims to describe, model, or detect
dependence between variables. At this level, we’re not
reasoning about any causal relationships between the
variables.
Questions at level 2 (the intervention level) involve non-
counterfactual hypothetical conditions, such as
“What would in-game purchases be for a player if side-
quest engagement were high?” P ( I  E =“high”)
At level 2, we formalize such questions with the ideal
intervention. Note that any query derived from a level 2
query is also a level 2 query, such as ATEs, (e.g., E (IE=“high” –
IE=“low”)) and CATEs.

Finally, counterfactual questions and queries fall at level 3
(the counterfactual level):
“Given this player had low side-quest engagement and
low purchases, what would their level of purchases have
been if they were more engaged?” P( I E =“high”| E=“low”,
I=“low”)
As with level 2 queries, any query we derive from a level 3
query also falls at level 3. For example, a causal attribution
query designed to answer “Why did this player have low
purchases” would be a level 3 query if it were a function of
level 3 queries like the probabilities of causation described in
section 8.3.
In identification, we work directly with queries. The y0 library
in Python gives us a domain specific language for
representing queries. The following code implements the
query P(IE=e).
Listing 10.1 Creating a query in y0
!pip install git+https://github.com/y0-causal-inference/y0.git@v0.2.0
from y0.dsl import P, Variable      #1
E = Variable("E")     #2
I = Variable("I")     #2
query = P[E](I)     #3
query      #4
#1 “P” is for probability distributions, and “Variable” is for defining.
variables.
#2 Define variables G (guild membership), E (side-quest engagement),
and I (in-game purchases).
#3 Define the distributional query P(I E).
#4 If running in a notebook environment, this will show a rendered
image of P(I E).

SETTING UP YOUR ENVIRONMENT
In this chapter, I rely on version 0.2.0 of the y0 library. As it
is a relatively new library, the library’s API is in
development and recent versions will deviate slightly from
what is shown here. Check out the library’s tutorials for
recent developments.
Again, we rely on Graphviz and some custom utilities for
plotting DAGs. The Graphviz installation depends on your
environment. I am using Ubuntu 22.04 and install Graphviz
via libgraphviz-dev. Then I install Python libraries graphviz
version 0.20.3, and PyGraphviz version 1.13. The Graphviz
code is for plotting only, so if you get stuck, you could
forgo plotting for the rest of the code.
The query object is an object of the class Probability. The
class’s __repr__ method (which tells Python what to return in
the terminal when you call it directly) is implemented such
that when we evaluate the object in the last line of the
preceding code in a Jupyter notebook, it will display rendered
LaTeX (a typesetting/markup language with a focus on math
notation), as in figure 10.2.
Figure 10.2 The rendered math image returned when you evaluate the
query object in listing 10.1
The causal hierarchy applies to models and data as well.

10.1.2 Where models and assumptions fall on
the hierarchy
A “model” is a set of assumptions about the data generating
process (DGP). Those assumptions live at various levels of
the hierarchy.
LEVEL 1 ASSUMPTIONS
Models at the associational level have statistical but non-
causal assumptions. For example, suppose we’re interested
in P(I  |E  = e ), for either value (“low”, “high”) that e might
take. We might fit a linear model to regress in-game
purchases I against side-quest engagement E. Or we might
train a neural network that maps E to I. These are two
statistical models with different parameterizations. In other
words, they differ in non-causal, statistical assumptions
placed on P(I|E). Once we add causal assumptions, we move
to a higher level of the hierarchy.
LEVEL 2 ASSUMPTIONS
Assumptions that we can represent with a causal DAG are
level 2 (interventional) assumptions. An example of a level 2
model would be a causal graphical model (aka, a causal
Bayesian network)—a probabilistic model trained on a causal
DAG. A causal DAG by itself is a level 2 set of assumptions;
assumptions about what causes what. Generally,
assumptions that let you deduce the consequences of an
intervention are level 2 assumptions.
LEVEL 3 ASSUMPTIONS
The canonical example of a level 3 model is a structural
causal model. But more generally, assumptions about

mechanism—how variables affect one another—are level 3
(counterfactual) assumptions.
One way to think about this is that any causal assumption
you cannot represent in the structure of the DAG is, by
process of elimination, a level 3 assumption. For example,
suppose your DAG has the edge X →Y. Further, you believe
the causal relationship between X and Y is naturally linear.
You can’t “see” linearity on the DAG structure, so linearity is
a level 3 assumption.
10.1.3 Where data falls on the hierarchy
Recall the differences between observational data and
interventional data. Observational data is passively
observed; as a result, it captures statistical associations
resulting from dependence between variables in the DGP.
LEVEL 1 DATA
In our online gaming example, the level 1 data was logged
examples of side-quest engagement and in-game purchases
pulled by a database query. Observational data lives at level
1 of the causal hierarchy.
LEVEL 2 DATA
Interventional data is generated as the result of applying an
intervention, such as data collected from a randomized
experiment. In the gaming example, this was the data
created because of an A/B test that randomly assigned
players to different groups where they are coerced into
different fixed side-quest engagement levels. Intervention
data lives at level 2 of the hierarchy.

LEVEL 3 DATA
Counterfactual data, which lives at level 3 of the hierarchy, is
the odd case. Counterfactual data would contain data from
across possible worlds. In most domains, we only have data
from one world—one potential outcome for each unit of
observation in the data.
However, there are special cases where counterfactual data
exists. For example, cloud service providers use complex but
deterministic policies for allocating resources in the cloud,
given various constraints. For one example with a given
allocation outcome in the log, we could generate a
counterfactual outcome for that example by applying a
different allocation policy to that example. Similarly, given
data produced by simulation software, we could generate
counterfactual data by changing the simulation to reflect a
hypothetical condition and then rerunning it with the same
initial conditions as the original data.
10.1.4 The causal hierarchy theorem
The causal hierarchy offers us a key insight from something
called the causal hierarchy theorem. That insight is this: “You
cannot answer a level k question without level k
assumptions.” For example, if you want a causal effect, you
need a DAG or some other level 2 (or level 3) assumptions. If
you want to answer a counterfactual question, you need
level 3 assumptions. And even the most cutting-edge of
deep learning models can’t answer level k questions reliably
unless they encode a representation of level k assumptions.
More formally, the causal hierarchy theorem establishes that
the three layers of the causal hierarchy are, in mathematical
jargon, “almost always separate.” Roughly speaking,
“separate” means that data from a lower level of the

hierarchy is insufficient to infer a query from a higher level of
the hierarchy. And “almost always” means this statement is
true except in cases so rare that we can dismiss them as
practically unimportant.
Aside from this insight, the causal hierarchy makes
understanding identification—perhaps the hardest topic in all
causal inference—much easier, as we’ll see in the rest of the
chapter.
10.2 Identification and the causal
inference workflow
In this section, we’ll look at the workflow for posing and
answering causal questions and the role that identification
plays in that workflow. We’ll use the online gaming DAG
introduced in chapter 7 as an example. Let’s start by
building the DAG with y0.

Listing 10.2 Building the online gaming DAG in y0
import requests     #1
def download_code(url):   #1
    response = requests.get(url)   #1
    if response.status_code == 200:    #1
        code_content = response.text   #1
        print("Code fetched successfully.")  #1
        return code_content    #1
    else:   #1
        print("Failed to fetch code.")    #1
        return None   #1
url = (   #1
    "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/altdeep/"   #1
    "causalML/master/book/chapter%2010/id_utilities.py"   #1
)   #1
utilities_code = download_code(url)   #1
print(utilities_code)    #2
# After checking, uncomment the exec call to load utilities
#exec(utilities_code)    #2
from y0.graph import NxMixedGraph as Y0Graph    #3
from y0.dsl import P, Variable    #4
G = Variable("G")   #4
E = Variable("E")     #4
I = Variable("I")    #4
dag = Y0Graph.from_edges(    #4
    directed=[     #4
        (G, E),   #4
        (G, I),     #4
        (E, I)     #4
    ]     #4
)     #4
gv_draw(dag)     #5
#1 Install Graphviz for DAG visualization. Download some helper
functions for identification and visualization that convert some y0
abstractions into abstractions we’re familiar with.
#2 Inspect the downloaded code before executing as a matter of good
security practice. Then uncomment the last line and execute.
#3 y0 works with a custom graph class called NxMixedGraph. To avoid
confusion, we’ll call it a Y0Graph and use it to implement DAGs.
#4 Build the graph.
#5 Draw the graph with a Graphviz helper function.
This produces the graph in figure 10.3.

Figure 10.3 Drawing the online gaming graph with y0
Our goal in chapter 7 was to use our model of P(G, E, I ) to
simulate from P(IE=“high”) using the intervention operator. In
sections 7.1.6 and 7.2.6, we did this simulation and saw
empirical evidence that it works for this online game
example. Identification means showing that it works in
general, based on your model and assumptions. Formally, we
want to be sure that level 1 distribution P(G, E, I), or data
from that distribution, combined with our DAG,
is enough to simulate from level 2 distribution P(IE=“high”).
Identification with y0 confirms that this is indeed possible.
Listing 10.3 Checking identification of P(IE=“high”) from P(G, E, I)
e = E    #1
check_identifiable(     #2
    dag,     #2
    query=P(I @ e),     #2
    distribution=P(G, E, I)    #2
)     #2
#1 Make a lowercase “e” to represent an intervention value.
#2 Check identifiability given the DAG, a distribution, and a target
query. Y0 represents ideal interventions with @, so we write P(I E=e as
P(I @ e).
This will return True, but what if we didn’t have any
observations of guild membership G ? We can use y0 to test
if we have identification for P(IE=“high”) from P(E, I ). In other

words, test if it is possible to infer P(IE=“high”) from
observations of E and I only.
Listing 10.4 Checking identification of P(IE=“high”) from P(E, I)
check_identifiable(
    dag,
    query=P(I @ e),
    distribution=P(E, I)
)
This will return False, because we don’t have identification
for P(IE = e ) from the DAG and P(E, I) given our graphical
assumptions.
LACK OF IDENTIFICATION AND MISGUIDED PROBABILISTIC ML
Y0 shows us that P(IE=e) is not identified from P(E, I) given
our online game DAG. Consider the implications of this
result from the perspective of probabilistic machine
learning (ML). As experts in probabilistic ML, given G is
unmeasured, we might be inclined to train a latent variable
model on P(E, I) where G is the latent variable. Once we’ve
learned that model, we could implement the intervention
with graph surgery setting E=e, and then sampling I from
the transformed model.
This algorithm would run; it would generate samples. But
the lack of identification result from y0 proves that, given
only the assumptions in our DAG, we could not consider
these to be valid samples from P(IE=e). And training on
more data wouldn’t help. The only way this could work is if
there were additional causal assumptions constraining
inference beyond the assumptions encoded by the DAG.
Given this introduction, let’s define identification.

10.2.1 Defining identification
Suppose I were to randomly choose a pair of numbers, X and
Y, and add them together to get Z. Then, I tell you what Z
was and ask you to infer the values of X and Y. Could you do
it? Not without more information. So, what if I gave you
millions of examples of feature Z and label {X, Y  }. Could
you train a deep learning model to predict label {X, Y  } from
input feature Z  ? Again, no, at least not without strong
assumptions on the possible values of {X, Y  }. What if,
instead of millions, I gave you billions of examples? No; more
data would not help. In statistics, we would say the
prediction target {X, Y  } is not identified.
In other words, you want to infer something, and you have
an algorithm (e.g., a deep net) that takes in data and
produces an answer. That answer will usually be a bit
different than the true value because of statistical variation
in the input data. If your inference objective is identified,
then the more data you input to the algorithm, the more that
variance will shrink and your algorithm’s answer will
converge to the true answer. If your inference objective is
not identified, then more data will not reduce your
algorithm’s errors.
Causal identification is just statistical identification across
levels of the causal hierarchy. A causal query is identified
when your causal assumptions enable you to infer that query
using data from a lower level on the hierarchy.
10.2.2 The causal inference workflow
Now that we have defined identification, we can define a full
workflow for causal inference. Figure 10.4 shows the full
workflow.

Figure 10.4 The causal inference workflow. The identification step is an
essential step in the workflow.
Identification is a key step in the workflow. Let’s walk
through each of the steps.
STEP 1: POSE YOUR QUERY
First, we pose our causal question as a query. For example,
given our question “What would in-game purchases be for a
player if side-quest engagement was high?” our query is P 
(IE=“high”).
Figure 10.5 Step 2: Build the model to capture your causal assumptions
relative to your query. For the query P(IE=“high”), this is our online
gaming DAG.
STEP 2: BUILD YOUR MODEL
Next, build a causal model that captures your basic causal
assumptions. Our model will be the online game causal DAG,

shown again in figure 10.5.
Your model’s assumptions should at least match the level of
your query in the causal hierarchy. For example, the query
P(IE=“high”) is a level 2 query, so we need at least some level
2 assumptions. The causal DAG is a level 2 causal model, so
in our analysis, the DAG provides the necessary level 2
assumptions.
STEP 3: CHECK IDENTIFICATION
Evaluate whether you have identification for your query,
given your model assumptions and your available data. If
you don’t have identification, you must either observe
additional variables in your data or change your
assumptions. For example, we could modify our online
gaming DAG (changing level 2 assumptions). Or simply stop
and conclude you can’t answer the question given your data
and knowledge about the problem, and devote your
attention elsewhere.
STEP 4: ESTIMATE YOUR QUERY
Once you know you have identification for your query, you
can run statistical inference on, or “estimate,” your query.
There are a variety of estimation methods and algorithms,
from Bayesian inference to linear regression to propensity
scores to double machine learning. We’ll review some
estimation methods in the next chapter.
STEP 5: REFUTE YOUR CAUSAL INFERENCE
Refutation is a final step where we conduct sensitivity
analysis to evaluate how sensitive our results from step 4 are
to violations of our assumptions, including the assumptions

that enabled identification. We’ll see examples of this in
chapter 11.
10.2.3 Separating identification and estimation
In many texts, identification and estimation are combined in
one step by matching the estimators and practical scenarios
where those estimators will work. In this book, we’ll highlight
the separation of identification and estimation for several
reasons:
The separation lets us shunt all the causal considerations
into the identification step. This helps us be explicit
about what causal assumptions we are relying on for
estimation to work and builds intuition for when our
analysis might fail.
The estimation step thus simplifies to purely statistical
questions, where we consider the usual statistical trade-
offs (bias vs. variance, uncertainty quantification, how
well it scales, etc.).
The separation also allows us to handle estimation with
the automatic differentiation capabilities that power
cutting-edge deep learning libraries without worrying
whether these learning procedures will get the causality
wrong.
Next, we’ll dive into the most common identification
strategy: backdoor adjustment.
10.3 Identification with backdoor
adjustment
Suppose we want to determine the causal effect of
engagement on in-game purchases, i.e., E  (IE = “high” – IE 
= “low”). We can derive this expectation from the query E (IE=e 

= i ), so we focus on P (I E = e = i  ). We can use the online
gaming DAG to prove the following is true:
We’ll see how to derive this equation in the next section. The
right side of this equation is a level 1 quantity called an
estimand that we can derive from the joint distribution P (I, E,
G ).
QUERIES, ESTIMANDS, AND ESTIMATORS
In statistics, the estimand is the thing the statistical
algorithm (the estimator) estimates. The task of
identification is finding (identifying) an estimand for your
query. In terms of the causal hierarchy, causal
identification is about finding a lower-level estimand for a
higher-level query.
In the online gaming backdoor identification example,
P(IE=“high”=i) is a level 2 query, and ∑gP(I=i|E=“high”,
G=g)P(G=g) is the level 1 estimand called the backdoor
adjustment estimand. Backdoor adjustment is an operation
we apply to P(E, I, G), where we sum out (or integrate out
in the continuous case) the common cause G. In some
cases, we’ll see we don’t need to know the estimand
explicitly, only that it exists.
We passed our DAG and the intervention-level query P (I E 
= “high”) to y0, and it told us it identified an estimand, an
operation applied to P (E, I, G  ) that is equivalent to P (IE 
= “high”). Let’s have y0 display that estimand.

Listing 10.5 Deriving the estimand to get P(IE=“high”) from P(E, I, G)
from y0.graph import NxMixedGraph as Y0Graph
from y0.dsl import P, Variable
from y0.algorithm.identify import Identification, identify
query = P(I @ e)
base_distribution = P(I, E, G)
identification_task = Identification.from_expression(
    graph=dag,
    query=query,
    estimand=base_distribution)
identify(identification_task)
This returns the expression in figure 10.6.
Figure 10.6 Output of y0’s identify function
In our notation, this is ∑ g P (I = i |E  =“high”, G  = g) ∑ε,iP(E  = 
ε, G  = g, I  = i), which simplifies to ∑ g P (I = i |E  = “high”, G  = 
g ) P(G  = g ). This is the backdoor adjustment estimand. We’ll
see at a high level how y0 derives this estimand. But first,
let’s look a bit more closely at this estimand.
10.3.1 The backdoor adjustment formula
In general terms, suppose X is a cause of Y, and we are
interested in the intervention-level query P(YX=x). In that
case, the backdoor adjustment estimand is ∑gP(X = x, Z  = z)
P (Z  = z ). The backdoor adjustment formula equates the
causal query P(XX=x) with its estimand: 
Here, Z is a set of variables called the adjustment set. The
summation is shorthand for summation and integration—you
sum over discrete variables in the adjustment set and

integrate over continuous variables. The adjustment set is
defined as fa set of variables that satisfies the backdoor
criterion—(1) the set collectively d-separates all backdoor
paths from X to Y, and (2) it contains no descendants of X.
To understand why we want to d-separate backdoor paths
between X and Y, consider again our DAG for our online
gaming example in figure 10.7.
Figure 10.7 The online gaming DAG
What is the difference between P(I |E  =“high”) and
P(IE=“high”)? Consider the two paths between E and I in figure
10.8. In the case of P(I |E  =“high”), observing E=“high” gives
us information about I by way of its direct causal impact on I,
i.e., through path E  →I. But observing E   = “high” also gives
us information about G, and subsequently about I through
the backdoor path E ←G →I. A backdoor path between two
variables is a d-connected path between a common cause. In
the case of P(IE=“high”), we only want the impact on I through
the direct path E→I.

Figure 10.8 E←G→I is a backdoor path where G is a “confounder” that is
a common cause of E and I. We are interested in the statistical signal
flowing along the causal path from E to I, but that signal is
“confounded” by the noncausal noise from additional statistical
information through G on the backdoor path E←G→I.
We call G a confounder, because the statistical “signal”
flowing along the causal path from E to I is “confounded” by
the noncausal “noise” from additional statistical information
through G on the backdoor path E ←G →I. To address this
problem, we seek to d-separate this backdoor path by
blocking on G.
We want to identify a backdoor estimand for the query
P(IE=“high”). So we substitute I for Y, and E  for X in the
backdoor adjustment formula. G blocks the backdoor path E
G I, so the set G becomes our adjustment set:
P (IE=e = i) = ∑g P (I  = i|E  = e, G  = g )P(G  = g )
The backdoor adjustment formula d-separates the backdoor
paths by summing out/integrating over, or in other words,
“adjusting for” the backdoor statistical signal, leaving only
the signal derived from the direct causal relationship.
NOTE  Some texts refer to the G-formula instead of
backdoor adjustment formula. The backdoor adjustment
formula is just the G-formula where the adjustment set is
defined in terms of the backdoor criterion.

While an adjustment set can include non-confounders, in
practice, excluding all but a minimal set of backdoor-
blocking confounders cuts down on complexity and
statistical variation. We dive into the statistical
considerations of backdoor adjustment in chapter 11.
10.3.2 Demystifying the back door
So where does the backdoor adjustment estimand come
from? Let’s consider our online gaming example again. The
query is P(I E= e) where e is “high” or “low.” In counterfactual
terms, let’s consider two possible worlds, one with our
original DAG, and one where we apply the intervention to
side-quest engagement (E). Let’s view the parallel world
graph in figure 10.9.
Figure 10.9 We have two parallel worlds: world A where E is not
intervened upon, and world B where E is intervened upon.

If you squint hard enough at this graph, you’ll notice that it
implies that E is conditionally independent from I E= e given
G. We’ll use some d-separation–based reasoning to see this.
Remember that, in general, we can’t use d-separation to
reason across worlds on a parallel world graph because the
d-separation rules don’t account for nodes that are
equivalent across worlds (like G). But we’ll use a trick where
we reason about conditional independence between E and I 
E= e by looking at a d-connected path from E to G in world A,
and then extend that d-connected path from the equivalent
G in world B to I E= e.
First, consider that paths from E in world A to world B have to
cross one of two bridges between worlds, NG and NI. But the
two paths to NI (E → I ← NI, E ← G → I ← NI) are both d-
separated due to the collider on I.
So we have one d-connected path to world B (E ← G ← NG).
Now suppose we look at G in world B; from world B’s G, it is
one step to I E= e. But we know that, by the law of
consistency, the value of G in both worlds must be the same;
both Gs are the same deterministic function of NG, and
neither G is affected by an intervention. So, for convenience,
we’ll collapse the two Gs into one node in the parallel world
graph (figure 10.10). Looking now at the path E ← G → I E= e,
we can see this path is d-separated by G. Hence, we can
conclude E ⊥ I E= e | G.

Figure 10.10 Collapsing G across worlds reveals G d-separates E and
IE=e.
In causal inference jargon, this simplification is called
ignorability. Ignorability means the causal variable E and the
counterfactual potential outcomes like I E= e are conditionally
independent given confounders. Ignorability is a common
assumption made in causal inference. We can use this
ignorability assumption in deriving the backdoor estimand.
Before we start, let’s recall a key definitional fact of
conditional independence: if two variables U and V are
conditionally independent given Z, then P (U  |Z  = z, V  = v ) =
P (U  |Z  = z). Flipping that around, P (U  |Z  = z ) = P (U  |Z  = z,
V  = v ). In other words, P (U  |Z   = z) = P (U  |Z   =  z, V   
= “apples”) = P (U  |Z   = z, V  =  “oranges”); it doesn’t matter
what value V takes because, since Z rendered it independent
from U, its value has no bearing on U. Introducing V and

giving it whatever value we want is the trick that makes the
derivation work. Also, recall the law of total probability says
that we can marginalize a variable out of a joint distribution
by summing (or integrating) over that variable, as in P (U  = 
u) = ∑vP (U  = u, V  = v ). The same is true when the joint
distribution is subject to intervention, as in P (UW=w = u) =
∑vP (UW=w = u, VW=w = v ).
Now let’s start with the causal query P (I E=e ) and see how to
equate it with the backdoor estimand ∑g P (I  |E  = e, G  = g)P 
(G  = g ).
1. For some value of in-game purchases i, P (IE=e = i ) = ∑g
P (IE=e = i, GE=e = g ) by the law of total probability.
2. ∑g P (IE=e=i, GE=e=g ) = ∑g P (IE=e=i, G =g ), because we
know from our original DAG that G is not affected by the
intervention on E.
3. Next we use the chain rule to factorize P (IE=e = i, G  = g ):
∑g P (IE=e = i, G  = g ) = ∑g P (IE=e = i | G  = g)P (G  = g ).
4. Now we come to the trick—P (IE=e = i  |G  = g ) = P (IE=e = 
i  |E  = e, G  = g ) for any value of e, because once we
condition on G=g, E=e and IE=e are independent. So in
our derivation, we can replace P (IE=e = i  |G  = g ) with P 
(IE=e = i  |E  = e, G  = g ).
5. Once we condition that E  = e, we can use the law of
consistency to drop the subscript: ∑g P (IE=e = i  |E  = e, G  
= g  )P (G  = g  ) = ∑g P (I  = i  |E  = e, G  = g )P (G  = g  ).
Let’s explain steps 4 and 5. Our ignorability result shows that
IE=e and E are conditionally independent given G. So in step
4 we apply the independence trick that lets us introduce E.
Further, we set the value of E to be e so it matches the

subscript E=e. This allows us to apply the law of consistency
from chapter 8 and drop the subscript E=e.
Voila, we’ve identified a backdoor estimand, an estimand
from level 1 of the causal hierarchy, for a level 2 causal
query P (IE=e) using level 2 assumptions encoded in a DAG.
Causal identification is just coming up with derivations like
this. Much, if not most, of traditional causal inference
research boils down to doing this kind of math, or writing
algorithms that do it for you.
Next, we’ll look at the do-calculus, which provides simple
graph-based rules for identification that we can use in
identification algorithms.
10.4 Graphical identification with the
do-calculus
Graphical identification (sometimes called nonparametric
identification) refers to identification techniques that rely on
reasoning over the DAG. One of the most well-known
approaches to graphical identification is the do-calculus, a
set of three rules used for identification with causal graphs.
The rules use graph surgery and d-separation to determine
cases when you can replace causal terms like IE=e with non-
causal terms like I  |E=e. Starting with a query on a higher
level of the causal hierarchy, we can apply these rules in
sequence to derive a lower-level estimand.
10.4.1 Demystifying the do-calculus
Recall high school geometry, where you saw if-then
statements like this:
If the shape is a square, then all the sides are equal.

When you were trying to solve a geometry problem, you
used facts like this in the steps of your solution.
Similarly, the do-calculus consists of three rules (if-then
statements) of the following form:
If certain variables are d-separated after applying graph
surgery to the DAG, then probability query A equals
probability query B.
THE RULES OF THE DO-CALCULUS ARE NOT INTUITIVE
The three rules of the do-calculus are not intuitive upon
reading them, just as geometric rules like cos2x + sin2x = 1
were not intuitive when you first saw them in high school.
But like those geometric rules, we derive the rules of the do-
calculus from simpler familiar concepts, namely d-
separation, ideal interventions, and the rules of probability.
And like the rules of geometry, we can use the rules of the
do-calculus to prove that a causal query from one level of
the hierarchy is equivalent to one from another level.
Practically speaking, we can rely either on software libraries
that implement the do-calculus in graphical identification
algorithms (like y0) or simply hard-code well-known
identification results like the backdoor adjustment estimand.
To take away some of the mystery, I’ll introduce the rules
and show how they can derive the backdoor estimand. The
goal here is not to memorize these rules, but rather to see
how they work in a derivation of the backdoor estimand that
contrasts with the derivation in the previous section.
In defining these rules, we’ll focus on the target distribution
Y under an intervention on X. We want to generalize to all
DAGs, so we’ll name two other nodes, Z and W. Z and W will
allow us to cover cases where we have another potential

intervention target Z and any node W we’d like to condition
upon. Further, while I’ll often refer to individual variables,
keep in mind that the rules apply when X, Y, Z, and W are
sets of variables.
RULE 1: INSERTION OR REMOVAL OF OBSERVATIONS
If Y and Z are d-separated in your DAG by X and W after
the incoming edges to X are removed . . .
Then P ( Y X = x=  y | Z  =  z, W  =  w) = P( Y X = x =  y | W  
=  w).
This is called “insertion or removal” because we can remove
Z =z from P (YX=x=y |Z  = z, W   = w) to get P(YX=x =y | W  = w)
and vice versa.
RULE 2: EXCHANGE OF AN INTERVENTION FOR AN
OBSERVATION
If Y and Z are d-separated in your DAG by X and W after
incoming edges in X and outgoing edges from Z have
been removed . . .
then P ( Y X = x , Z = z= y | W =  w) = P( Y X = x =  y | Z  =  
z, W  =   w).
Here we can either exchange the intervention Z=z in P (YX=x,
Z=z = y | W   = w) for conditioning on the observation Z  = z to
get P(YX=x=y | Z  = z, W  = w), or vice versa.
RULE 3: INSERTION OR REMOVAL OF INTERVENTIONS
For rule 3, we are going to define Z as a set of nodes, and
Z(W  ) as the subset of Z that are not ancestors of W.

If Y and Z are d-separated in your DAG by X and W after
you remove all incoming edges to X and Z( W) . . .
then P( Y X = x , Z = z =  y | W =  w) = P( Y X = x =  y | W = 
w).
This rule allows you to insert Z=z into P (YX=x = y | W  = w) to
get P (YX=x, Z=z = y | W  = w) or remove Z=z from P(YX=x, Z=z= 
y | W=w) to get P (YX=x=y | W  = w).
10.4.2 Using the do-calculus for backdoor
identification
Now we’ll use the do-calculus to provide an alternative
derivation of the backdoor estimand that differs from our
“ignorability”-based definition. Again, I include this
derivation to demystify the application of the do-calculus.
Don’t worry if you don’t completely follow each step:
1. P (IE=e = i ) = ∑g P (IE=e = i, GE=e = g ) by the law of total
probability.
2. ∑g P (IE=e =i, GE=e = g ) = ∑g P (IE=e, G=g = i )P  (G E=e, I=i = 
g ) by way of c-component factorization.
3. P (IE=e, G=g = i) = P (I = i  |E  = e, G  = g ) by rule 2 of the
do-calculus.
4. P(GE=e, I=i = g) = P (G  = g) by rule 3 of the do-calculus.
5. Therefore, P (IE=e = i)  = ∑g P (I  = i  |E  = e, G  = g ) P (G  = 
g ) by plugging 3 and 4 into 2.
The do-calculus rules are applied in steps 3 and 4.
Note  Step 2 uses a factorization rule called c-
component factorization. A c-component (confounded
component) is a set of nodes in a DAG where each pair of

observable nodes is connected by a path with edges that
always point toward, never away from, the observable
nodes (these are the “orphaned cousins” mentioned in
chapter 4). The joint probability of the observed
variables can be factorized into c-components, and this
fact enabled step 2. Factorizing over c-components is
common in identification algorithms. See the references
in the chapter notes at
https://www.altdeep.ai/p/causalaibook.
This do-calculus-based derivation is far less intuitive than our
“ignorability”-based derivation. There are two advantages
we get in exchange for that of intuition. First, the do-calculus
is complete, meaning that if a query has an identifiable
estimand using graphical assumptions alone, it can be
derived using the do-calculus. Second, we have algorithms
that leverage the do-calculus to automate graphical
identification.
10.5 Graphical identification
algorithms
Graphical identification algorithms, often called ID
algorithms, automate the application of graph-based
identification systems like the do-calculus. When we used y0
to check for identification of P (IE=e ) and to derive the
backdoor estimand, it was using its implementation of
graphical identification algorithms. In this section, we’ll see
how we can use these algorithms to identify another useful
estimand called the front-door estimand.
10.5.1 Case study: The front-door estimand
In our online gaming example, suppose we were not able to
observe guild membership. Then we would not have

backdoor identification of P (IE=e). However, suppose we had
a mediator between side-quest engagement (E ) and in-game
purchases (I  )—a node on the graph between E and I.
Specifically, our mediator represents won items (W  ), as seen
in figure 10.11.
Figure 10.11 Side-quest engagement leads to winning virtual items like
this magic bow. Won items drive more in-game purchases, such as
magic arrows for the magic bow, so we introduce a mediator “won
items” on the causal path between side-quest engagement and in-game
purchases.
The idea of won items is as follows. When a player
successfully completes a side-quest, they win a virtual item.
The more side-quests they finish, the more items they earn.
Those won virtual items and purchased virtual items can
complement one another. For example, winning a magic bow
motivates purchases of magical arrows. Thus, the amount of
won items a player has influences the amount of virtual
items they purchase.

Given this graph, we can use y0’s implementation of
graphical identification algorithms to derive the front-door
estimand.
Listing 10.6 Deriving the front-door estimand in y0
from y0.graph import NxMixedGraph as Y0Graph
from y0.dsl import P, Variable
G = Variable("G")     #1
E = Variable("E")     #1
I = Variable("I")    #1
W = Variable("W")     #1
e = E     #1
dag = Y0Graph.from_edges(     #1
    directed=[     #1
        (G, E),    #1
        (G, I),     #1
        (E, W),   #1
        (W, I)    #1
    ]     #1
)     #1
query=P(I @ e)     #2
base_distribution = P(I, E, W)    #3
identification_task = Identification.from_expression(    #4
    graph=dag,    #4
    query=query,     #4
    estimand=base_distribution)     #4
identify(identification_task)     #4
#1 Build a new graph with the mediator variable.
#2 Still the same query as in listing 10.5, P(I_{E=e})
#3 But now we observe I, E, and W
#4 Finally, we check if the query is identified given the DAG and
observational distribution.
This code will return the output in figure 10.12.
Figure 10.12 Y0 renders a math figure as output of identification.
Rearranging the output, and in our notation, this is the
result:

Simplifying as before, we get the front-door estimand:
Note that there is an outer summation over W and an inner
summation over all values of E (with each value of E denoted
as ε, distinct from the intervention value e).
10.5.2 Demystifying the front door
Like the backdoor estimand, the do-calculus derivation of the
front-door estimand involves repeated substitutions using
rules 2 and 3. The rough intuition behind the front-door
estimand is that the statistical association between side-
quest engagement and in-game purchases comes from both
the direct causal path and the path through the backdoor
confounder guild membership (G ). The front-door estimand
uses the mediator to determine how much of that
association is due to the direct causal path; the mediator
acts as a gauge of the flow of statistical information through
that direct causal path.
A key benefit of the estimand is that it does not require
observing a set of confounders that block all possible
backdoor paths. Avoiding backdoor adjustment is useful
when you have many confounders, are unable to adjust due
to latent confounders, or are concerned that there might be
some unknown confounders.
Next, we’ll examine how to identify counterfactuals.

10.6 General counterfactual
identification
The causal DAG is a level 2 modeling assumption. The causal
hierarchy theorem tells us that the graph in general is not
sufficient to identify level 3 counterfactual queries. For
counterfactual identification from level 1 or level 2
distributions, you need level 3 assumptions. In simple terms,
a level 3 assumption is any causal assumption that you can’t
represent with a simple causal DAG.
In chapter 9, I introduced the general algorithm for
counterfactual inference. The algorithm requires a structural
causal model (SCM), which is a level 3 model; it encapsulates
level 3 assumptions. With an SCM, the algorithm can infer all
counterfactual queries that can be defined on its underlying
variables. The cost of this ability is that the SCM must
encapsulate all the assumptions needed to answer all those
queries. Many of these assumptions cannot be validated with
level 1 or level 2 data.
The more assumptions you make, the more vulnerable your
inferences are to violations of these assumptions. For this
reason, we seek identification techniques that target specific
counterfactual queries (rather than every counterfactual
query) with the minimal set of level 3 assumptions possible.
10.6.1 The problem with the general algorithm
for counterfactual inference
We can see the problem with the general algorithm for
counterfactual inference when we apply it to two similar
SCMs. Let’s suppose there is a ground-truth SCM that differs
from the SCM you are using to run the algorithm. Suppose
both SCMs have the exact same underlying DAG and the

same statistical fit on observational and experimental data;
in other words, the SCMs provide the same inferences for all
level 1 and level 2 queries. Your SCM could still produce
different (inaccurate) counterfactual inferences relative to
the ground-truth SCM.
To see why, recall the stick-breaking example from chapter 6.
I posed two similar but different SCMs. This was the first:
And this was the second:
Figure 10.13 visualizes sampling a single value from these
models.

Figure 10.13 Two different SCMs encode the exact same observational
and interventional distributions, but given the same exogenous variable
value, you can get two different values of the corresponding
endogenous variable in each model.
Figure 10.13 shows how, given a value of ny = .15, the sticks
break at the .15 meters point, but the first stick will break in
region 2, returning a value of 2, while the second stick will
break in region 3, returning a 3. They produce different
outcomes given the same random input because they differ
in a level 3 assumption, i.e., how they process the input.
For this reason, when we go in the opposite direction and
apply the abduction step in the general counterfactual
inference algorithm, we can get different results across these
models. For a given value of the endogenous variable, we

can get different posterior distributions on the exogenous
variable.
Figure 10.14 illustrates how the two models, for an observed
outcome of 3, would produce different inferences on Ny. For
the first SCM, a value of y = 3 means P (Ny |Y  =  3) is a
continuous uniform distribution on the range (px1 + px2) to 1,
and for the second SCM, it is a continuous uniform
distribution on the range 0 to px3. These different
distributions of P (Ny |Y  =  3) would lead to different results
from the counterfactual inference algorithm. Now suppose
SCM 2 is right and SCM 1 is wrong. If we choose SCM 1, our
counterfactual inferences will be inaccurate.

Figure 10.14 The two SCMs, despite encoding the same set of
observational and interventional distributions, would produce two
different posteriors of Ny given Y=3 in the abduction step. Therefore,
they encode different counterfactual distributions and can produce
different counterfactual inferences.
The general case is even harder; there can be many SCMs
entailing the same level 1 and 2 assumptions but have
different level 3 assumptions. You might learn one of those
SCMs by, for example, using a deep neural network-based
approach to learn a deep SCM from level 1 and level 2 data.
But the deep SCM might not be the right SCM with respect to
the counterfactual inferences you want to make.

The general algorithm for counterfactual inference is ideal if
you are confident in the ground-truth SCM. But in cases
where you aren’t, you can look toward counterfactual
identification, where you specify a minimal set of level 3
assumptions that enable you to identify a target
counterfactual query.
10.6.2 Example: Monotonicity and the
probabilities of causation
Monotonicity is an example of a powerful level 3 assumption.
Monotonicity is the simple assumption that the relationship
between a cause X and an outcome Y is monotonic: E (Y  |X 
=x ) either never increases or never decreases as x
increases. Note that linearity is a special case of
monotonicity.
An intuitive example of monotonicity and non-monotonicity
is in the dosage of medicine. In a monotonic dose-response
relationship, taking more of the medicine either helps or
does nothing. In a non-monotonic dose-response
relationship, taking the medicine might help at a normal
dose, but taking an overdose might cause the problem to get
worse. Monotinicity helps identification by eliminating
counterfactual possibilities; if the dose-response relationship
is monotonic, when you imagine what would have happened
if you took a stronger dose, you can eliminate the possiblity
that you would have gotten worse.
Recall the probabilities of causation we saw in chapter 8:
Probability of necessity (PN): P (YX=0 = 0|X  = 1, Y  = 1)
Probability of sufficiency (PS): P (YX=1 = 1|X  = 0, Y   = 0)
Probability of necessity and sufficiency (PNS): P (YX=1 = 1,
YX=0 = 0)

Given monotonicity, we can identify the following level 2
estimands for the probabilities of causation.
PN = (P(Y  = 1) – P (YX=0 = 1))/P (X=1, Y=1)
PS = (P (YX=1 = 1) – P (Y  = 1))/P (X  = 0, Y  = 0)
PNS = P (YX=1 = 1) – P (YX=0 = 1)
We can estimate these level 2 estimands from level 2 data,
such as a randomized experiment. And, of course, if we only
have observational data, we can use backdoor or front-door
adjustment or another identification strategy to infer P (YX=0 
=1) and P (YX=1 =1) from that data.
We could derive these estimands by hand again, but instead,
let’s think about the monotonicity enabled this identification
by eliminating counterfactual possibilities. To see this,
consider our uplift modeling question in chapter 8. There, X
was whether we sent a promotion, and Y was whether the
customer remained a paying subscriber (Y  = 1) or “churned”
(unsubscribed; Y  = 0). We segmented the subscribers as
follows:
Persuadables —Subscribers whose chance of remaining
increases when you send a promotion
Sure things —Subscribers who have a high chance of
remaining regardless of whether you send a promotion
Lost causes —Subscribers who have a low chance of
remaining regardless of whether you send a promotion
Sleeping dogs: Subscribers whose chances of remaining
go down when you send a promotion
If you assume monotonicity, you are assuming that sending
the promotion either does nothing or increases the chances
of remaining. It assumes there are no users who will respond

poorly to the promotion. In other words, assuming
monotonicity means you assume there are no sleeping dogs.
Now let’s consider how this narrows things down. Suppose
you have the following question:
I failed to send a promotion to a customer and they
churned. Would they have remained had I sent the
promotion? P ( Y X =1 = 1| X  = 0, Y  = 0)
This counterfactual query is the probability of sufficiency. We
want to know if sending the promotion would have increased
the chances of their remaining. Thinking through the
question,
If the customer was a persuadable, sending the
promotion would have increased their chances of
remaining.
If the customer was a lost cause, sending the promotion
would have had no effect.
If the customer was a sleeping dog, sending the
promotion would have made them even less likely to
remain.
It’s hard to determine if we should have sent the promotion if
being a persuadable and being a sleeping dog were both
possible for this customer, in one case the promotion would
have helped and in the other it would have made churning
even more certain. But if we assume monotonicity, we
eliminate the possibility that they were a sleeping dog, and
can conclude sending the promotion would have helped or,
at least, not have hurt their chances of staying.

BAYESIAN MODELING AND COUNTERFACTUAL IDENTIFICATION
Although the graphical identification algorithms will work
with some counterfactual queries, we don’t have general
algorithms for counterfactual identification. But given our
focus on the tools of probabilistic ML, we can look to
Bayesian modeling for a path forward.
Identification is fundamentally about uncertainty. For
example, in the counterfactual case, a lack of identification
means that even with infinite level 1 and level 2 data, you
can’t be certain about the true value of the level 3 query.
From a Bayesian perspective, we can use probability to
handle that uncertainty.
Suppose you have a set of causal assumptions, including
non-graphical assumptions, and some level 1 and 2 data.
You can take the following Bayesian approach to test
whether your assumptions and data are sufficient to
identify your counterfactual query:
1. Specify a set of SCMs that are diverse yet all consistent
with your causal assumptions.
2. Place a prior distribution over this set, such that more
plausible models get higher prior probability values.
3. Obtain a posterior distribution on the SCMs given
observational (level 1) and interventional (level 2)
data.
4. Sample SCMs from the posterior distribution, and for
each sample SCM, you apply the general algorithm for
counterfactual inference for a specific counterfactual
query.
The result would constitute the posterior distribution over
this counterfactual inference. If your causal assumptions
and your data are enough to identify the counterfactual

query, the posterior on the counterfactual inference will
converge to the true value as the size of your data
increases. (Successful convergence assumes typical
“regularity” conditions for Bayesian estimation. Results will
depend on the quality of the prior.) But even if it doesn’t
converge to the true value, your assumptions might still
enable convergence to a ballpark region around the true
value that is small enough to be useful (this is called
partial identification, as described in section 10.9).
The Pyro library, and its causality-focused extension
ChiRho, facilitate combining Bayesian and causal ideas in
this way.
There are generalizations of monotonicity from binary
actions (like sending or not sending a promotion) to multiple
actions as in a decision or reinforcement learning problem,
see the course notes at
https://www.altdeep.ai/p/causalaibook for references.
10.7 Graphical counterfactual
identification
A conventional causal DAG only encodes level 2
assumptions, but there are graphical techniques for
reasoning about counterfactuals. Graphical counterfactual
inference only works in special cases, but these cases are
quite practical. Further, working with graphs enables us to
automate identification with algorithms. To illustrate
graphical counterfactual identification, we’ll introduce a new
case study.
When you open Netflix, you see the Netflix dashboard, which
shows several forms of recommended content. Two of these

are “Top Picks For You,” which is a personalized selection of
shows and movies that Netflix’s algorithms predict you will
enjoy based on your past viewing behavior and ratings, and
“Because You Watched,” which recommends content based
on things you watched recently. The model of this system
includes the following variables:
T —A variable for the recommendation policy that selects
a subscriber’s “Top Picks for You” content. For simplicity,
we’ll consider a policy, “+t  ”, that is currently in
production. We’ll use “–t  ”, meaning “not t  ”, to
represent alternative policies.
B —A variable for the recommendation policy that selects
a subscriber’s “Because You Watched” content. Again,
we’ll simplify this to a binary variable with policy “+b ”,
representing the policy in production, and all alternative
policies “–b ”, as in “not b .”
V —The amount of engagement that a subscriber has
with the content recommended by “Because You
Watched.”
W —The amount of engagement that a subscriber has
with the content recommended by “Top Picks for You.”
A —Attrition, meaning whether a subscriber eventually
leaves Netflix.
C —Subscriber context, meaning the type of subscriber
(location, demographics, preferences, etc.) we are
dealing with.
Recommendation algorithms always take the profile of the
subscriber into account, along with the viewership history, so
subscriber profile C is a cause of both recommendation
policy variables T and B.
In this section, we’ll use y0 to analyze this problem at
various levels of the hierarchy. We’ll start by visualizing the

graph.
Listing 10.7 Plot the recommendation DAG
T = Variable("T")     #1
W = Variable("W")    #1
B = Variable("B")    #1
V = Variable("V")    #1
C = Variable("C")    #1
A = Variable("A")    #1
t, a, w, v, b = T, A, W, V, B   #1
dag = Y0Graph.from_edges(directed=[     #2
    (T, W),    #2
    (W, A),    #2
    (B, V),    #2
    (V, A),    #2
    (C, T),    #2
    (C, A),    #2
    (C, B)    #2
])    #2
gv_draw(dag)    #3
#1 Define variables for the model.
#2 Create the graph.
#3 Plot the graph.
Figure 10.15 Causal DAG for the recommendation algorithm problem
This generates the DAG in figure 10.15.

As a preliminary investigation, you might look at the average
treatment effect (ATE, a level 2 query) of the “Top Picks for
You” content on attrition E (AT=+t – AT=–t). Given that attrition
A has a binary outcome, we can write this as P (AT=+t =+a ) –
P (AT=–t = +a ). Focusing on P (AT=–t = +a ), we know right
away that we can identify this via both the (level 2) backdoor
and the front door. So let’s move on to an interesting (level
3) counterfactual query called effect of treatment on the
treated (ETT).
10.7.1 Effect of treatment on the treated
Recall that you get the ATE directly (without needing to
identify and estimate a level 1 estimand) from a randomized
experiment. Suppose you ran such an experiment on a
cohort of users, and it showed a favorable ATE, such as that
+t has a favorable impact on W and A relative to –t. So your
team deploys the policy.
Suppose the +t policy works best with users who have
watched a lot of movies and thus have more viewing data.
For this reason, when the policy is deployed to production,
such users are more likely to get assigned the policy. But
since they are so highly engaged, they are unlikely to leave,
regardless of whether they are assigned the +t or –t policy.
We could have a situation where the +t policy looks effective
in an experiment where people are assigned policies
randomly, regardless of their level of engagement, but in
production the assignment is biased to highly engaged
people who are indifferent to the policy.
The level 3 query that addresses this is a counterfactual
version of the ATE called effect of treatment on the treated
(ETT, or sometimes ATT, as in average treatment effect on
the treated). We write this as counterfactual query E (AT=+t –

AT=–t |T  =  +t ), as in “for people who saw policy +t, how
much more attrition do they have relative to what they
would have if they had seen –t ?” Decomposing for binary A
as we did with the ATE, we can write this as P(AT=+t=+a|T  = 
+t) – P(AT=–t = +a|T  = +t). P(AT=+t = +a |T  = +t ) simplifies to
P (A  = +a |T  = +t ) by the law of consistency. So we can focus
on the second term, P (AT=–t=+a |T=+t ).
In this special case of binary A, we can identify the ETT using
graphical identification (for non-binary A, more level 3
assumptions are needed). To do graphical identification for
counterfactuals, we can use graphical identification
algorithms with counterfactual graphs.
10.7.2 Identification over the counterfactual
graph
Y0 can derive an estimand for ETT using a graphical
identification algorithm called “IDC*” (pronounced I-D-C-
star).

GRAPH ID ALGORITHMS, ID, IDC, ID*, IDC*, IN Y0
Some of the core graphical identification algorithms
implemented in y0 are ID, ID*, IDC, and IDC*. ID identifies
interventional (level 2) queries from a DAG and
observational (level 1) data. ID* identifies counterfactual
(level 3) queries from observational and experimental
(level 1 and level 2) data. IDC and IDC* extend ID and ID*
to work on queries that condition on evidence, such as ETT.
The algorithms use the structure of the causal graph to
recursively simplify the identification problem by removing
irrelevant variables and decomposing the graph into c-
component subgraphs. They apply the rules of do-calculus
to reduce intervention terms, block confounding backdoor
paths, and factorize the query into simpler subqueries. If
no further simplification is possible due to the graph's
structure, the algorithms return a 'non-identifiable' result.
This chapter's code relies on Y0’s implementations of these
algorithms, though Y0 implements other graphical
identification algorithms as well.
Listing 10.8 Identifying ETT with a graphical identification algorithm
from y0.algorithm.identify.idc_star import idc_star
idc_star(
    dag,
    outcomes={A @ -t: +a},     #1
    conditions={T: +t}    #2
)
#1 Hypothetical outcome A T=–t = +a
#2 Factual condition T = +t
This will produce a rather verbose level 2 estimand. We can
then apply level 2 graphical identification algorithms to get a
level 1 estimand, which will simplify to the following:

I’ll show a simple derivation in the next section.
For now, the intuition is that we are applying graphical
identification algorithms over something called a
counterfactual graph. Up until now, our graph of choice for
counterfactual reasoning was the parallel world graph.
Indeed, we can have y0 make a parallel world graph for us.
Listing 10.9 Plotting the parallel world graph with y0
from y0.algorithm.identify.cg import make_parallel_worlds_graph
parallel_world_graph = make_parallel_worlds_graph(    #1
    dag,  #1
     {frozenset([+t])}    #1
)    #1
gv_draw(parallel_world_graph)     #2
#1 The make_parallel_worlds_graph method takes an input DAG and
sets of interventions. It constructs a new world for each set.
#2 The helper function visualizes the graph in a familiar way.
This graph differs slightly from the ones I’ve drawn because
the algorithm applies the subscript for an intervention to
every node in the world where the intervention occurred; the
subscript indexes all the variables in a world. It’s up to us to
reason that C from one world and C+t from another must
have the same outcomes, since C+t is not affected by its
world’s intervention do(T  = +t ).
Now recall that the problem with the parallel world graph is
that d-separation won’t work with it. For example, in figure
10.16, d-separation suggests that C and C+t are conditionally
independent given their common exogenous parent NC, but
we just articulated that C and C+t must be the same; if C has
a value, C+t must have the same value, so they are perfectly
dependent.

Figure 10.16 A parallel world graph drawn by y0 (and Graphviz). In this
version of the parallel world graph, the subscripts indicate a world. For
example, +t indicates the world where the intervention do(T=+t) is
applied. To prevent confusion, the exogenous variables use superscripts
instead of subscripts to indicate their child endogenous variables (e.g.,
NC is the parent of C (and C+t).
We can remedy this with the counterfactual graph. A
counterfactual graph is created by using a parallel world
graph and the counterfactual query to understand which
nodes across worlds in the parallel world graph are
equivalent, and then collapsing equivalent nodes into one.
The resulting graph contains nodes across parallel worlds
that are relevant to the events in the query. Unlike parallel

world graphs, you can use d-separation to reason about
counterfactual graphs. We can use y0 to create a
counterfactual graph for events AT=–t  =  +a and T  =  +t.
Listing 10.10 Listing 10.10 Counterfactual graph events AT=–t=+a and
T=+t
from y0.algorithm.identify.cg import make_counterfactual_graph
events = {A @ -t: +a, T: +t}    #1
cf_graph, _ = make_counterfactual_graph(dag, events)
gv_draw(cf_graph)
#1 Counterfactual graphs work with event outcomes in the query. For
P(A T=–t=+a|T=+t), we want events A T=–t =+a and T=+t.
This creates the counterfactual graph in figure 10.17.
Figure 10.17 Counterfactual graph for events, produced by y0 (and
Graphviz). T–t corresponds to the intervention do(T=–t).

At a high level, graphical identification algorithms in y0 do
counterfactual identification by working with counterfactual
graphs in lieu of conventional DAGs. First, it finds a level 2
estimand for a level 3 query. From there, you can use
experimental data to answer the level 2 terms in the
estimand, or you can attempt to further derive them to level
1 estimands from the level 2 terms.
GRAPHS ALONE WON’T WORK WHEN YOU CONDITION ON OUTCOME!
Suppose that instead of the ETT term P(AT=–t=+a|T=+t),
you were interested in P(AT=–t =+a|T=+t, A=+a),
answering the question “Given a subscriber exposed to
policy +t and later unsubscribed, would they still have
unsubscribed had they not been exposed to that policy?”
Or you could be interested in E(AT=–t – AT=+t|T=+t, A=+a)
sometimes called counterfactual regret, which captures
the amount the policy +t contributed to an unsubscribed
individual’s decision to unsubscribe.
P(AT=–t=+a|T=+t, A=+a) is an example of a query where
the hypothetical outcomes and factual conditions are in
conflict. In this case, the factual conditions contain an
outcome for A, and the hypothetical condition contains an
interventional outcome for A. The graphical counterfactual
identification techniques mentioned in this section will not
work for this type of query. Identification in this case
requires additional level 3 assumptions.
This is unfortunate, because this type of counterfactual is
precisely the kind of “how might things have turned out
differently?” counterfactual questions that are the most
interesting, and the most central to how humans reason
and make decisions.

We can also use graphical identification for more advanced
queries. For example, suppose you want to isolate how T
affects A from how B affects A. You want to focus on users
where B was –b. You find the data from a past experiment
where “Because you watched . . .” policy B was randomized.
You take that data and zoom in on participants in the
experiment who were assigned –b. The outcome of interest
in that experiment was V, the amount of engagement with
the content recommended in the “Because you Watched”
box. So you have the outcomes of VB=–b for those
subscribers of interest. With this new data, you expand your
query from P (AT=–t = +a |T  = +t) to P (AT=–t =  +a |T  =  +t, B   
=  –b, VB=–b = v ), including VB=–b=v because it is helpful in
predicting attrition. Now you have three parallel worlds to
reason over: the actual world, the world with do(T   =  +t ),
and the world with do(B   =  –b ).
Listing 10.11 Create a parallel world graph for do(T=+t) and do(B=–b)
parallel_world_graph = make_parallel_worlds_graph(
    dag,
   {frozenset([-t]), frozenset([-b])}      #1
)
gv_draw(parallel_world_graph)
#1 The second argument enumerates the hypothetical conditions.
This code creates this three-world parallel world graph seen
in figure 10.18.

Figure 10.18 A parallel world graph with the actual world T=+t and
hypothetical worlds do(T=–t) and do(B=–b). The dashed lines are edges
from exogenous variables (dark gray).
Notably, the query P (AT=–t  =  +a |T  = +t, B  =  –b, VB=–b = v )
collapses the parallel world graph to the same counterfactual
graph as P (AT=–t = +a |T   =  +t ).
Listing 10.12 Counterfactual graph for expanded expression
joint_query = {A @ -t: +a, T: +t, B: -b, V @ -b: +v}
cf_graph, _ = make_counterfactual_graph(dag, joint_query)
gv_draw(cf_graph)
This gives us the counterfactual graph in figure 10.19, which
is the same as the graph in figure 10.17.

Figure 10.19 The counterfactual graph for P(AT=–t=+a|T=+t, B=–b,
VB=–b=v) is the same as for P(AT=–t=+a|T=+t).
Next, we’ll look at another graph-based approach called
single-world intervention graphs.
10.7.3 Counterfactual identification with single-
world intervention graphs
Single-world intervention graphs (SWIGs) provide an
alternative to counterfactual identification with
counterfactual graphs. Like a counterfactual graph, we
construct a SWIG using the original causal DAG and the
causal query. We’ll use the Netflix recommendation example

to construct a SWIG for the interventions do(T  =  –t ) and do
(B  =  –b ). Let’s construct a SWIG from a causal DAG.
NODE-SPITTING OPERATION
We have the intervention that targets do(T   =  +t ), and we
can implement it with a special kind of graph surgery called
a node-splitting operation. We split a new node off the
intervention target T, as in figure 10.20. T still represents the
same variable as in the original graph, but the new node
represents a constant, the intervention value +t. T keeps its
parents (in this case C ) but loses its children (in this case
W  ) to the new node.
SUBSCRIPT INHERITANCE
Next, every node downstream of the new node inherits the
new node’s values as a subscript. For example, in figure
10.21, W and A are downstream of the intervention, so the
subscript T= –t is appended to these nodes, so they become
WT= -t and AT= -t.

Figure 10.20 The intervention operator for a SWIG is the node-splitting
operation.
Figure 10.21 Every node downstream of the intervention gets the
intervention subscript.

REPEAT FOR EACH INTERVENTION
We repeat this process for each intervention. In figure 10.22,
we apply do(B  = –b), and split B and we convert V to VB=–b
and AT=-t to AT=–t,B=–b.
Figure 10.22 A node takes the subscript of all its upstream
interventions.
Like the counterfactual graph, the SWIG contains
counterfactual variables and admits d-separation. With these
properties, we can do identification.
10.7.4 Identification with SWIGs
Suppose we are interested in ETT and want to identify P 
(AT= –t =  +a |T  =  +t ). We derive the SWIG in figure 10.23.

Figure 10.23 We can use the SWIG to derive ETT using the ignorability
trick.
With this graph, we can identify P (AT=–t =  +a |T  = +t ) using
the ignorability trick I introduced in section 10.4:
1. P(AT=–t = +a|T  = +t) = ∑c P (AT=–t = +a, CT=–t=c |T  =  +t )
by the law of total probability.
2. ∑c P (AT= –t =  +a, CT=–t =c  |T  = +t ) = ∑c P (AT=–t = +a, C  
= c |T =+t ), since C is not affected by interventions on T.
3. ∑c P (AT=–t =  +a, C  = c |T  = +t ) factorizes into ∑c P (AT=–t
=+a |C  = c, T = +t ) P (C  = c | T  =  +t ) by the chain rule
of probability.
4. P (AT=–t =  +a |C = c, T  =  +t ) = P (AT=–t =  +a |C  = c, T  =  –
t ), again by the ignorability trick.
5. And as before, P (AT=–t = +a |C  = c, T  = –t) = P (A =  
+a |C  =c , T  =  –t ) by the law of consistency. Thus, P 
(AT=–t = +a |T  =  +t ) = ∑c P(A =  +a |C  = c, T  =  –t ) P(C  = 
c | T  = +t )

The magic happens in the ignorability trick in step 4, where
C’s d-separation of AT=–t and T lets us change T  =  +t to T  
=  –t. Notice that the same d-separation exists in the
counterfactual graph we derived for P (AT=–t = +a |T  =  +t ),
shown in figure 10.17. The difference is that deriving the
SWIG is easy, while deriving the counterfactual graph is
nuanced, and one generally uses an algorithm like
make_counterfactual_grap in y0.
10.7.5 The single-world assumption
The node-splitting operation relies on a new level 3
assumption. If you are going to node-split a variable X, then
you are assuming it is possible to know what value X would
naturally take without the intervention and that it would be
possible for you intervene before it realized that value.
Imagine in our Netflix example that, given a subscriber had
profile C=c, the recommendation algorithm was about to
assign the subscriber a policy +t for recommending “Top
picks for you,” but before that policy went into effect, you
intervened and artificially changed it to –t . It’s possible that
the way you forced the policy to be –t had some side effects
that changed the recommendation system in some
fundamental way, such that in this new system, T would not
have been +t, in the first place. With the single-world
assumption, you assume you can know T’s natural value
would have been +t, and that your intervention wouldn’t
change the system in a way that would affect T taking that
natural value. You are implicitly making this assumption
when you reason with SWIGs.
That assumption allows you to avoid the need to create
additional worlds to reason over. You can condition on
outcome T  = +t  and intervene do(T  = –t ) in a “single world.”
You can also run experiments, where you apply the
intervention do(T  = –t ) and test if T (where you know T’s

“natural values”) is conditionally independent of A(T  =  –t )
given C. This reduces the number of counterfactual queries
you can answer, but proponents of SWIGs suggest this is a
strength, because it limits you to counterfactuals that can be
validated by experiments.

CONTRASTING COUNTERFACTUAL GRAPHS AND SWIGS
Counterfactual graphs and SWIGs are similar in function,
but they are distinctly different artifacts.
Counterfactual 
graphs —The 
counterfactual 
graph
works by collapsing equivalent parallel world graph
nodes over possible worlds. They only contain nodes
relevant to the specific query. They are defined for
binary events like {T=+t} and {T=–t}—this works well
even 
with 
continuous 
variables, 
because
counterfactual 
language 
typically 
compares 
one
hypothetical condition to one factual condition (e.g.,
“We invested 1 million; what if we had invested
{2/more/half/…}?”).
Single-world intervention graphs (SWIGs) —The SWIG
works by applying a node-splitting type of graph
surgery. Unlike counterfactual graphs, they work with
general variables (rather than just binary events) and
are not query-specific (all original nodes are present).
However, they rely on a single-world assumption—that
it is possible to know with certainty what value a
variable would have taken had it not been intervened
upon.
The primary use case for both graphs is identification.
Neither counterfactual graphs nor SWIGs enable
identification from level 1 or 2 data of counterfactual
queries such as P(AT=–t=+a|T=+t, A=+a) where the same
variable appears in the hypothetical outcome and the
factual condition. But you can still derive the
counterfactual graph for such queries; this is not true for
SWIGs. That is useful if you want to reason about

independence across worlds in cases of queries such as
P(AT=–t=+a|T=+t, A=+a).
10.8 Identification and probabilistic
inference
We’ve seen that a core part of the identification task is
deriving an estimand. How does that estimand mesh with a
probabilistic machine learning approach?
Consider, for example, our online game model, where ETT =
E (IE=“high” – IE=“low” |E   = “high”) = E (IE=“high”|E  = “high”) – E 
(IE=“low”|E  = “high”). We need to identify P (IE=“high”|E  
= “high”) and P (IE=“low”|E   = “high”). Recall that P (IE=“high”|E  
= “high”) simplifies to the level 1 query P (I  |E =“high”) by
the law of consistency, so the challenge lies with identifying
the counterfactual distribution P (IE=“low”|E   =“high”).
Using a probabilistic machine learning approach with Pyro,
we know we can infer P (I  |E   = “high”) by using
pyro.condition to condition on E  = “high” and then running
inference. The question is how we’ll infer the counterfactual
distribution P (IE=“low”|E  = “high”).
In the previous section, we saw that we can identify this
query with a SWIG (assuming the single-world assumption
holds). We used the SWIG to derive the following estimand
for P (IE=0=i  |E  = “high”):
But what do we do with this estimand with respect to
building a model in Pyro? We could construct two Pyro

models, one for P(G |E ) and one for P(I  |G, E ), infer P (I   = i  |
G   = g, E   = “low”) and P (G   = g | E   = “high”) and then do
the summation. But this is inelegant relative to our regular
approach to probabilistic inference with a causal generative
model:
1. Implement the full causal generative model.
2. Train its parameters on data.
3. Apply 
the 
intervention 
operator 
to 
simulate 
an
intervention.
4. Run an inference algorithm.
In this approach, we build one causal model—we don’t build
separate models for the estimand's components P (G  |E ) and
P (I   |G, E  ). Nonetheless, our regular approach to
probabilistic inference with a causal generative model does
work if we have identification, given the causal assumptions
we implement in step 1 and the data we train on in step 2.
We don’t even need to know the estimand explicitly; it is
enough to know it exists—in other words, that the query is
identified (e.g., by using Y0’s check_ identifiable function).
With identification, steps 2–4 collectively become just
another estimator for that estimand.
To illustrate, let’s consider how we’d sample from P 
(IE=“low”|E  = “high”) using a Pyro model of our online gaming
example. For simplicity, let’s replace E   = “high” and E   
= “low” with E   = 1 and E   =  0 respectively. We know P 
(IE=0|E  = 1) is identified given our causal DAG and the single-
word assumption. Fortunately, Pyro’s (and ChiRho’s) do
intervention operator implements the SWIG’s node-splitting
operation by default (if you used pyro.render_model to visualize
an intervention and didn’t get what you expected, this is
why). For ordinary interventional queries on a causal DAG,
there is no difference between this and the ordinary graph

surgery approach to interventions. But when we want to
condition on E   = 1 and intervene to set E   =  0, Pyro will
accommodate us. We’ll use this approach to sample from P 
(IE=0|E   = 1). As a sanity check, we’ll also sample from the
plain vanilla intervention distribution P(IE=0) and contrast
those samples with samples from P(IE=0|E  = 1).
SETTING UP YOUR ENVIRONMENT
As a change in pace, I’ll illustrate this example using
NumPyro instead of Pyro, though the code will work in Pyro
with small tweaks. We’ll use NumPyro version 0.15.0. We’ll
also use an inference library meant to complement
NumPyro and Pyro called Funsor, version 0.4.5. We’ll also
use Matplotlib for plotting.
First, let’s build the model.
NUMPYRO VS. PYRO
Pyro extends PyTorch, while NumPyro extends NumPy and
automatic differentiation with JAX. The user interfaces are
quite similar. If you are less comfortable with PyTorch
abstractions and debugging PyTorch errors, or you prefer
MCMC-based inference with the Bayesian programming
patterns one uses in Stan or PyMC, then you might prefer
NumPyro.

Listing 10.13 Generating from P(IE=0) vs. P(IE=0|E=1) in Pyro
import jax.numpy as np
from jax import random
from numpyro import sample
from numpyro.handlers import condition, do
from numpyro.distributions import Bernoulli, Normal
from numpyro.infer import MCMC, NUTS
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
rng = random.PRNGKey(1)
def model():    #1
    p_member = 0.5  #1
    is_guild_member = sample(    #1
        "Guild Membership",    #1
        Bernoulli(p_member)   #1
    )    #1
    p_engaged = (0.8*is_guild_member + 0.2*(1-is_guild_member))    #1
    is_highly_engaged = sample(    #1
        "Side-quest Engagement",  #1
        Bernoulli(p_engaged)   #1
    )    #1
    p_won_engaged = (.9*is_highly_engaged + .1*(1-is_highly_engaged))    #1
    high_won_items = sample("Won Items", Bernoulli(p_won_engaged))    #1
    mu = (    #1
        37.95*(1-is_guild_member)*(1-high_won_items) +    #1
        54.92*(1-is_guild_member)*high_won_items +    #1
        223.71*(is_guild_member)*(1-high_won_items) +    #1
        125.50*(is_guild_member)*high_won_items    #1
    )   #1
    sigma = (   #1
        23.80*(1-is_guild_member)*(1-high_won_items) +    #1
        4.92*(1-is_guild_member)*high_won_items +    #1
        5.30*(is_guild_member)*(1-high_won_items) +    #1
        53.49*(is_guild_member)*high_won_items    #1
    )  #1
    norm_dist = Normal(mu, sigma)#1
    in_game_purchases = sample("In-game Purchases", norm_dist)    #1
#1 A version of the online gaming model. The weights are estimates
from the data (learning procedure not shown here).
Next, we’ll apply the intervention and run inference to
sample from P (IE=0).

Listing 10.14 Apply intervention do(E=0) and infer from P(IE=0)
intervention_model = do(     #1
    model,    #1
    {"Side-quest Engagement": np.array(0.)})    #1
intervention_kernel = NUTS(intervention_model)    #2
intervention_model_sampler = MCMC(    #2
    intervention_kernel,   #2
    num_samples=5000,  #2
    num_warmup=200     #2
)     #2
intervention_model_sampler.run(rng)    #2
intervention_samples = intervention_model_sampler.get_samples()    #2
int_purchases_samples = intervention_samples["In-game Purchases"] #2
#1 Apply the do operator to the model.
#2 Apply inference to sample from P(I E=0).
We’ll contrast these samples from P (IE=0) with samples we’ll
draw from P (IE=0|E  = 1). To infer P (IE=0 |E   = 1), we’ll
condition intervention_model on the factual condition E   = 1.
Then we’ll run inference again on this conditioned-upon
intervened-upon model.
Listing 10.15 Condition intervention model and infer P(IE=0|E=1)
cond_and_int_model = condition(    #1
    intervention_model,   #1
     {"Side-quest Engagement": np.array(1.)}   #1
)    #1
int_cond_kernel = NUTS(cond_and_int_model)    #2
int_cond_model_sampler = MCMC(     #2
    int_cond_kernel,     #2
    num_samples=5000,     #2
    num_warmup=200   #2
)     #2
int_cond_model_sampler.run(rng)     #2
int_cond_samples = int_cond_model_sampler.get_samples()   #2
int_cond_purchases_samples = int_cond_samples["In-game Purchases"]  #2
#1 Now apply the condition operator to sample from P(I E=0|E=1).
#2 Apply inference to sample from P(I E=0|E=1).
Note that Pyro’s do and condition subroutines mutually
compose; i.e., for a model with a variable X,
do(condition(model, {"X": 1.}), {"X": 0.}) is equivalent to
condition(do(model, {"X": 0.}), {"X": 1.}).

Finally, we’ll plot samples from P (IE=0) and P (IE=0|E   = 1) and
evaluate the difference in these distributions.
Listing 10.16 Plot samples from P(IE=0) and P(IE=0|E=1)
plt.hist(     #1
    int_purchases_samples,   #1
    bins=30,    #1
    alpha=0.5,    #1
    label='$P(I_{E=0})$'   #1
)     #1
plt.hist(     #2
    int_cond_purchases_samples,    #2
    bins=30,     #2
    alpha=0.5,     #2
    label='$P(I_{E=0}|E=1)$'     #2
)     #2
plt.legend(loc='upper left')    #2
plt.show()    #2
#1 Plot a histogram of samples from P(I E=0).
#2 Plot a histogram of samples from P(I E=0|E=1).
This code generates the histograms in figure 10.24.

Figure 10.24 Histograms of samples from P(IE=0) and P(IE=0|E=1)
generated in Pyro

In this example, the parameters were given. In chapter 11,
where we’ll look at estimation, we’ll seamlessly combine this
query inference with Bayesian parameter inference from
data.
10.9 Partial identification
We’ll close this chapter with a quick note on partial
identification. Sometimes a query is not identified, given
your assumptions, but it may be partially identifiable. Partial
identifiability means you can identify estimands for an upper
and lower bound of your query. Partial identification is highly
relevant to causal AI because machine learning algorithms
often rely on finding and optimizing bounds on objective
functions. Let’s walk through a few examples.

MCMC VS. SVI
Here we used Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC), but both
Pyro and NumPyro have abstractions for stochastic
variational inference (SVI). In this example, the parameters
(p_member, p_engaged, etc.) of the model are specified. We
could also make the parameters unknown variables with
Bayesian priors and do the inference on these causal
queries P(IE=0) and P(IE=0|E=1); in this case, we’d be doing
Bayesian inference of these queries.
But for this we’d need N IID samples from an observational
distribution where we had graphical identification (P(G, E,
W, I), P(G, E, I), or P(E, W, I)). In the case of P(G, E, W, I),
where all the variables in the DAG are observed, the
number of unknown variables is just the number of
parameters. But in the latter two cases, of P(G, E, I) or P(E,
W, I), where there is a latent G or W of size N, the number
of unknowns grows with N. In this case, SVI will scale
better with large N. We’ll see an example in chapter 11.
Suppose in our online gaming example you ran an
experiment where you randomly assigned players to a
treatment or control group. Players in the treatment group
are exposed to a policy that encourages more side-quest
engagement. You reason that since you can’t actually force
players to engage in side-quests, it’s better to have this
randomized treatment/control variable as a parent of our
side-quest engagement variable, as seen in the DAG in figure
10.25.

Figure 10.25 We don’t have identification for the ATE of E on I because
G and W are unobserved. But we have partial identification given
variable A, representing gamers’ assignments in a randomized
experiment.
For this new variable A, let A  = 1 refer to the treatment
group and A=0 refer to the control group. We have this new
variable A, and the average treatment effect of the policy on
in-game purchases E(IA=1 – IA=0) is an interesting query. But
suppose we’re still ultimately interested in knowing the
average treatment effect of side-quest engagement itself on
purchases, i.e., E(IE=“high” – IE=“low”).
If guild membership (G ) were observed, we’d have
identification through backdoor adjustment. If won items
(W  ) were observed, we could use front-door adjustment. But
suppose that in this scenario you observe neither. In this
case, observing the side-quest group assignment variable
would give you partial identification. Suppose that the in-
game purchases variable was a binary 1 for “high” and 0 for
“low” instead of a continuous value. Then the bounds on
E(IE=“high” – IE=“low”) are

These bounds can be the next best thing to having full
identification, especially if the bounds are tight.
Alternatively, perhaps it is enough to know that the lower
bound on the ATE for side-quest engagement is significantly
greater than 0.
Similarly, general bounds exist for common counterfactual
queries, such as probabilities of causation. For example,
suppose you wanted to know if high side-quest engagement
was a necessary and sufficient condition of high in-game
purchases. You can construct the following bounds on the
probability of necessity and sufficiency (PNS):
These bounds consist of level 2 quantities like P (IE=e= i ), and
you can go on to identify level 1 estimands if possible given
your assumptions.
Remember that partial identification bounds are highly
specific to your causal assumptions (like the DAG) and the
parameterization of the variables; for example, the
preceding examples are specific to binary variables. See the
chapter notes at https://www.altdeep.ai/p/causalaibook for
links to papers that derived these bounds as well as bounds
for other practical sets of assumptions.

Summary
The importance of causal identification has increased in
the AI era as we seek to understand the causal inductive
bias in deep learning architectures.
Libraries like y0 implement strategies for algorithmic
identification.
The causal hierarchy is a three-tiered structure that
categorizes the causal questions we pose, the models we
develop, and the causal inferences we draw. These levels
are association, intervention, and counterfactual.
Association-level 
reasoning 
addresses 
“what 
is”
questions and models that answer these questions with
basic statistical assumptions.
Interventional or counterfactual queries fall on their
corresponding level of the hierarchy.
Observational data falls on the associational level, and
experimental data falls on the interventional level of the
hierarchy. Counterfactual data arises in situations where
the modeler can control a deterministic data generating
process (DGP).
Causal identification is the procedure of discerning when
causal inferences can be drawn from experimental or
observational data. It is done by determining if data at a
lower level of the hierarchy can be used to infer a query
at a higher level of the hierarchy.
An example of a causal identification result is the
backdoor formula, which equates intervention level
query P (YX=x) to association level quantity ∑zP (Y  |X  = x,
Z  = z)P (Z   = z), where Z is a set of common causes.
The causal hierarchy theorem shows how lower-level
data is insufficient to infer a distribution at a higher level
without higher-level modeling assumptions.

The do-calculus has three rules that can be used for
graph-based identification.
A counterfactual graph is a DAG that includes variables
across counterfactual worlds on one graph. Unlike the
parallel world graph, it admits d-separation. We derive
the counterfactual graph from the parallel world graph
and the target query.
Graphical 
identification 
algorithms 
automate
identification with graphs using rules such as the do-
calculus.
Nonparametric identification is identification with non-
graphical assumptions, such as assumptions about the
functional relationships between variables in the model.
The ignorability assumption is that the causal variable
and 
the 
potential 
outcomes 
are 
conditionally
independent given confounders.
Effect of treatment on the treated (ETT) evaluates the
effect of a cause on the subset of the population that
was exposed to the cause.
Single world intervention graphs (SWIGs) provide an
intuitive alternative to counterfactual identification with
do-calculus 
and 
counterfactual 
graphs. 
They 
are
constructed by applying a node-splitting operation to the
original 
causal 
DAG. 
SWIGs 
use 
a 
“single-world”
assumption, which assumes it’s possible to know a
variable’s natural value while also intervening on it
before it realizes that value without any side-effects that
would affect that natural value.
SWIGs work with variables and a narrow set of
counterfactuals under the single-world assumption, while
counterfactual graphs can accommodate queries that
cannot be graphically identified.
Pyro implements the SWIG’s node-splitting model of
intervention, which enables probabilistic inference of

SWIG-identified quantities.
Inference of causal queries using a causal graphical
model and probabilistic inference algorithms is possible
as long as the query is identified, given the model’s
assumptions and training data.
Partial identification means you can at least identify
estimands for bounds on a target query. This can be
quite useful if you lack full identification, especially since
machine learning often works by optimizing bounds on
objective functions.

Part 4 Applications of
causal inference
In part 4, we’ll turn our attention to the application of causal
inference methods to practical problems. You will gain
hands-on experience with causal effect estimation
workflows, automated decision-making, and the integration
of causality with large language models and other
foundation models. By this end of this part, you’ll be able to
use machine learning–based methods for causal effect
estimation, as well as use causal inference methods to
enhance modern machine learning applications from
reinforcement learning to cutting-edge generative AI.

11 Building a causal
inference workflow
This chapter covers
Building a causal analysis workflow
Estimating causal effects with DoWhy
Estimating 
causal 
effects 
using 
machine 
learning
methods
Causal inference with causal latent variable models
In chapter 10, I introduced a causal inference workflow, and
in this chapter we’ll focus on building out this workflow in
full. We’ll focus on one type of query in particular—causal
effects—but the workflow generalizes to all causal queries.
We’ll focus on causal effect inference, namely estimation of
average treatment effects (ATEs) and conditional average
treatment effects (CATEs) because they are the most popular
causal queries.
In chapter 1, I mentioned “the commodification of
inference”—how modern software libraries enable us to
abstract away the statistical and computational details of the
inference algorithm. The first thing you’ll see in this chapter
is how the DoWhy library “commodifies” causal inference,
enabling us to focus at a high level on the causal
assumptions of the algorithms and whether they are
appropriate for our problem.
We’ll see the phenomenon at play again in an example that
uses probabilistic machine learning to do causal effect
inference on a causal generative model with latent variables.

Here, we’ll see how deep learning with PyTorch provides
another way to commodify inference.
11.1 Step 1: Select the query
Recall the causal inference workflow from chapter 10, shown
again in figure 11.1.
Figure 11.1 A workflow for a causal inference analysis
Let’s return to our online gaming example and use this
workflow to answer a simple question:
How much does side-quest engagement drive in-game
purchases?
We’ll call the cause of interest, Side-Quest Engagement (E),
the “treatment” variable; In-Game Purchases (I) will be the
“outcome” variable. Our query of interest is the average
treatment effect (ATE):
E(IE=“high” – IE=“low”)

REFRESHER: WHY ATES AND CATES DOMINATE
Estimating ATEs and CATEs is the most popular causal
effect inference task for several reasons, including the
following:
We can rely on causal effect inference techniques
when randomized experiments are not feasible,
ethical, or possible.
We can use causal effect inference techniques to
address practical issues with real-world experiments
(e.g., 
post-randomization 
confounding, 
attrition,
spillover, missing data, etc.).
In an era when companies can run many different
digital experiments in online applications and stores,
causal effect inference techniques can help prioritize
experiments, reducing opportunity costs.
Further, as we investigate our gaming data, we find data
from a past experiment designed to test the effect of
encouraging side-quest engagement on in-game purchases.
In this experiment, all players were randomly assigned either
to the treatment group or a control group. In the treatment
group, the game mechanics were modified to tempt players
into engaging in more side-quests, while the control group
played the unmodified version of the game. We’ll define the
Side-Quest Group Assignment (A) variable as whether the
player was assigned to the treatment group in this
experiment or the control group.
Why not just go with the estimate of the ATE produced by
this experiment? This would be an estimate of E(IA=“treatment”
– IA=“control”).

This is the causal effect of the modification of game
mechanics on in-game purchases. While this drives side-
quest engagement, we know side-quest engagement is also
driven by other potentially confounding factors. So we’ll
focus on E(IE=“high” – IE=“low”).
11.2 Step 2: Build the model
Next, we’ll build our causal model. Since we are targeting an
ATE, we can stick with a DAG. Let’s suppose we build a more
detailed version of our online gaming example and produce
the causal DAG in figure 11.2.
Figure 11.2 An expanded version of the online gaming DAG. With
respect to the causal effect of side-quest engagement on in-game
purchases, we add two additional confounders and two instruments.
The expanded model adds some new variables:

Side-Quest Group Assignment (A) —Assigned a value of 1
if a player was exposed to the mechanics that
encouraged 
more 
side-quest 
engagement 
in 
the
randomized experiment; 0 otherwise.
Customization 
Level 
(C) —A 
score 
quantifying 
the
player’s customizations of their character and the game
environment.
Time Spent Playing (T) —How much time the player has
spent playing.
Prior Experience (Y) —How much experience the player
had prior to when they started playing the game.
Player Skill Level (S) —A score of how well the player
performs in game tasks.
Total Inventory (V) —The amount of game items the
player has accumulated.
We are interested in the ATE of Side-Quest Engagement on
In-Game Purchases, so we know, based on causal sufficiency
(chapter 3), that we need to add common causes for these
variables. We’ve already seen Guild Membership (G ), but
now we add additional common causes: Prior Experience,
Time Spent Playing, and Player Skill Level. We also add Side-
Quest Group Assignment and Customization Level because
these might be useful instrumental variables—variables that
are causes of the treatment of interest, and where the only
path of causality from the variable to the outcome is via the
treatment. I’ll say more about instrumental variables in the
next section.
Finally, we’ll add Total Inventory. This is a collider between
In-Game Purchases and Won Items. Perhaps it is common for
data scientists in our company to use this as a predictor of
the In-Game Purchases. But as you’ll see, we’ll want to avoid
adding collider bias to causal effect estimation.

SETTING UP YOUR ENVIRONMENT
The following code was written with DoWhy 0.11 and
EconML 0.15, which expects a version of NumPy before
version 2.0. The specific pandas version was 1.5.3. Again,
we use Graphviz for visualization, with python PyGraphviz
library version 1.12. The code should work, save for
visualization, if you skip the PyGraphviz installation.
First, let’s build the DAG and visualize the graph with the
PyGraphviz library.
Listing 11.1 Build the causal DAG
import pygraphviz as pgv     #1
from IPython.display import Image    #2
causal_graph = """
digraph {
    "Prior Experience" -> "Player Skill Level";
    "Prior Experience" -> "Time Spent Playing";
    "Time Spent Playing" -> "Player Skill Level";
    "Guild Membership" -> "Side-quest Engagement";
    "Guild Membership" -> "In-game Purchases";
    "Player Skill Level" -> "Side-quest Engagement";
    "Player Skill Level" -> "In-game Purchases";
    "Time Spent Playing" -> "Side-quest Engagement";
    "Time Spent Playing" -> "In-game Purchases";
    "Side-quest Group Assignment" -> "Side-quest Engagement";
    "Customization Level" -> "Side-quest Engagement";
    "Side-quest Engagement" -> "Won Items";
    "Won Items" -> "In-game Purchases";
    "Won Items" -> "Total Inventory";
    "In-game Purchases" -> "Total Inventory";
}
"""     #3
G = pgv.AGraph(string=causal_graph)   #3
G.draw('/tmp/causal_graph.png', prog='dot')    #4
Image('/tmp/causal_graph.png')    #5
#1 Download PyGraphviz and related libraries.
#2 Optional import for visualizing the DAG in a Jupyter notebook
#3 Specify the DAG as a DOT language string, and load a PyGraphviz
AGraph object from the string.
#4 Render the graph to a PNG file.
#5 Display the graph.
This returns the graph in figure 11.3.

Figure 11.3 Visualizing our model with the PyGraphviz library
At this stage, we can validate our model using the
conditional independence testing techniques outlined in
chapter 4. But keep in mind that we can also focus on the
subset of assumptions we rely on for causal effect estimation
to work in the “refutation” (step 5) part of the workflow.
11.3 Step 3: Identify the estimand
Next, we’ll run identification. Our causal query is

E(IE=“high” – IE=“low”)
For simplicity, let’s recode “high” as 1 and “low” as 0.
E(IE=1 – IE=0)
This query is on level 2 of the causal hierarchy. We are not
running an experiment; we only have observational data—
samples from a level 1 distribution. Our identification task is
to use our level 2 query and our causal model and identify a
level 1 estimand, an operation we can apply to the
distribution of the variables in our data.
First, let’s download our data and see what variables are in
our observational distribution.
Listing 11.2 Download and display the data
import pandas as pd
data = pd.read_csv(
    "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/altdeep/causalML/master/datasets
  ↪/online_game_example_do_why.csv"     #1
)
print(data.columns)     #2
#1 Download an online gaming dataset.
#2 Print the variables.
This prints out the following set of variables:
Index(['Guild Membership', 'Player Skill Level', 'Time Spent Playing',
       'Side-quest Group Assignment', 'Customization Level',
       'Side-quest Engagement', 'Won Items', 'In-game Purchases',
       'Total Inventory'],
      dtype='object')
Our level 1 observational distribution includes all the
variables in the DAG except Prior Experience. Thus, Prior
Experience is a latent variable (figure 11.4).

Figure 11.4 Prior Experience is not observed in the data; it is a latent
(unobserved) variable with respect to our DAG.
We specified the base distribution for the estimand using
y0’s domain-specific language for probabilistic expressions:
Identification.from_expression(
    graph=dag,
    query=query,
    estimand=observational_distribution
)
Here, we’ll use DoWhy. With DoWhy, we specify the
observational distribution by just passing in the pandas
DataFrame, along with the DAG and the causal query, to the
constructor of the CausalModel class.

Listing 11.3 Instantiate an instance of DoWhy’s CausalModel
from dowhy import CausalModel     #1
model = CausalModel(
    data=data,     #2
    treatment='Side-quest Engagement',     #3
    outcome='In-game Purchases',   #3
    graph=causal_graph    #4
)
#1 Install DoWhy and load the CausalModel class.
#2 Instantiate the CausalModel object with the data, which represents
the level 1 observational distribution from which we derive the
estimands.
#3 Specify the target causal query we wish to estimate, namely the
causal effect of the treatment on the outcome.
#4 Provide the causal DAG.
Next, the identify_effect methods will show us possible
estimands we can target, given our causal model and
observed variables.
Listing 11.4 Run identification in DoWhy
identified_estimand = model.identify_effect()    #1
print(identified_estimand)
#1 The identify_effect method of the CausalModel class lists identified
estimands.
The identified_estimand object is an object of the class
IdentifiedEstimand. Printing it will list the estimands, if any,
and the assumptions they entail. In our case, we have three
estimands we can target:
The 
backdoor 
adjustment 
estimand 
through 
the
adjustment set Player Skill Level, Guild Membership, and
Time Spent Playing
The 
front-door 
adjustment 
estimand 
through 
the
mediator Won Items
Instrumental variable estimands through Side-Quest
Group Assignment and Customization Level

GRAPHICAL IDENTIFICATION IN DOWHY
At the time of writing, DoWhy does implement graphical
identification algorithms like y0, but these are
experimental and are not the default identification
approach. The default approach looks for commonly used
estimands (e.g., backdoor, front door, instrumental
variables) based on the structure of your graph. There may
be identifiable estimands that the default approach misses,
but these would be estimands that are not commonly
used.
Let’s examine these estimands more closely.
11.3.1 The backdoor adjustment estimand
Let’s look at the printed summary for the first estimand, the
backdoor adjustment estimand:
Estimand type: EstimandType.NONPARAMETRIC_ATE
### Estimand : 1
Estimand name: backdoor
Estimand expression:
           d                                                                  
────────────────────────(E[In-game Purchases|Time Spent Playing,Guild 
d[Side-quest Engagement]                                                      
Membership, Player Skill Level])
Estimand assumption 1, Unconfoundedness: If U→{Side-quest Engagement} and U→In-game P
urchases then P(In-game Purchases|Side-quest Engagement,Time Spent Playing,Guild Memb
ership,Player Skill Level,U) = P(In-game Purchases|Side-quest Engagement,Time Spent P
laying,Guild Membership,Player Skill Level)
This printout tells us a few things:
EstimandType.NONPARAMETRIC_ATE—This means the estimand
can be identified with graphical or “nonparametric”
methods, such as the do-calculus.

Estimand name: backdoor—This is the backdoor adjustment
estimand.
Estimand expression—The mathematical expression of the
estimand. Since we want the ATE, we modify the
backdoor estimand to target the ATE.
Estimand assumption 1—The causal assumptions underlying
the estimand.
The last item is the most important. For each estimand,
DoWhy lists the causal assumptions that must hold for valid
estimation of the target causal query. In this case, the
assumption is that there are no hidden (unmeasured)
confounders, which DoWhy refers to as U. Estimation of a
backdoor adjustment estimand assumes that all confounders
are adjusted for.
Note that we do not need to observe Prior Experience to
obtain a backdoor adjustment estimand. We just need to
observe an adjustment set of common causes that d-
separates or “blocks” all backdoor paths.
The next estimand in the printout is an instrumental variable
estimand.
11.3.2 The instrumental variable estimand
The printed summary for the second estimand, the
instrumental variable estimand, is as follows (note, I
shortened the variable names to acronyms so the summary
fits this page):

### Estimand : 2
Estimand name: iv
Estimand expression:
 ⎡                                         -1⎤
 ⎢    d           ⎛     d                ⎞  ⎥
E⎢──────────(IGP)⋅     ───────────([SQE])    ⎥
 ⎣d[SQGA CL]      ⎝ d[SQGA  CL]          ⎠  ⎦
Estimand assumption 1, As-if-random: 
    If U→→IGP then ¬(U →→{SQGA,CL})
Estimand assumption 2, Exclusion:
    If we remove {SQGA,CL}→{SQE} then ¬({SQGA,CL}→IGP)
There are two level 2 definitional requirements for a variable
to be a valid instrument:
1. As-if-random—Any 
backdoor 
paths 
between 
the
instrument and the outcome can be blocked.
2. Exclusion—The instrument is a cause of the outcome
only indirectly through the treatment.
The variables in our model that satisfy these constraints are
Side-Quest Group Assignment and Customization Level, as
shown in figure 11.5.

Figure 11.5 Side-Quest Group Assignment and Customization Level are
valid instrumental variables.
The printout of identified_estimand shows the two constraints:
1. Estimand assumption 1, As-if-random—DoWhy assumes that
none of the other causes of the outcome (In-Game
Purchases) are also causes of either instrument. In other
words, there are no backdoor paths between the
instruments and the outcome.
2. Estimand assumption 2, Exclusion—This says that if we
remove the causal path from the instruments to the
treatment (Side-quest Engagement), there would be no
causal paths from the instruments to the outcome (In-
Game Purchases). In other words, there are no causal
paths between the instruments and the outcome that are
not mediated by the treatment.

Note that DoWhy’s constraints are relatively restrictive;
DoWhy prohibits the existence of backdoor paths and non-
treatment-mediated causal paths between the instrument
and the outcome. In practice, it would be possible to block
these paths with backdoor adjustment. DoWhy is making a
trade-off that favors a simpler interface.
PARAMETRIC ASSUMPTIONS FOR INSTRUMENTAL VARIABLE
ESTIMATION
The level 2 graphical assumptions are not sufficient for
instrumental variable identification; additional parametric
assumptions are needed. DoWhy, by default, makes a
linearity assumption. With a linear assumption, you can
derive the ATE as a simple function of the coefficients of
linear models of outcome and the treatment given the
instrument. DoWhy does this by fitting linear regression
models.
Next, we’ll look at the third estimand identified by DoWhy—
the front door estimand.
11.3.3 The front-door adjustment estimand
Let’s move on to the assumptions in the third estimand, the
front-door estimand. DoWhy’s printed summary is as follows
(again, I shortened the variable names to acronyms in the
printout so it fits the page):

### Estimand : 3
Estimand name: frontdoor
Estimand expression:
 ⎡     d                d        ⎤
E⎢────────────(IGP)⋅───────([WI])⎥
 ⎣d[WI]       d[SQE]             ⎦
 Estimand assumption 1, Full-mediation: 
    WI intercepts (blocks) all directed paths from SQE to IGP.
Estimand assumption 2, First-stage-unconfoundedness:
    If U→{SQE} and U→{WI}
    then P(WI|SQE,U) = P(WI|SQE)
Estimand assumption 3, Second-stage-unconfoundedness:
    If U→{WI} and U→IGP
    then P(IGP|WI, SQE, U) = P(IGP|WI, SQE)
As we saw in chapter 10, the front-door estimand requires a
mediator on the path from the treatment to the outcome—in
our DAG, this is Won Items. The printout for
identified_estimand lists three key assumptions for the front-
door estimand:
1. Full-mediation—The mediator (Won-Items) intercepts all
directed 
paths 
from 
the 
treatment 
(Side-Quest
Engagement) to the outcome (In-Game Purchases). In
other words, conditioning on Won-Items would d-
separate (block) all the paths of causal influence from
the treatment to the outcome.
2. First-stage-unconfoundedness—There 
are 
no 
hidden
confounders between the treatment and the mediator.
3. Second-stage-unconfoundedness—There 
are 
no 
hidden
confounders between the outcome and the mediator.
With our DAG and the variables observed in the data, DoWhy
has identified three estimands for the ATE of Side-Quest
Engagement on In-Game Purchases. Remember, the
estimand is the thing we estimate, so which estimand should
we estimate?

11.3.4 Choosing estimands and reducing “DAG
anxiety”
In step 2 of the causal inference workflow, we specified our
causal assumptions about the domain as a DAG (or SCM or
other causal model). The subsequent steps all rely on the
assumptions we make in step 2.
Errors in step 2 can lead to errors in the results of the
analysis, and while we can empirically test these
assumptions to some extent (e.g., using the methods in
chapter 4), we cannot verify all our causal assumptions with
observational data alone. This dependence on our subjective
and unverified causal assumptions leads to what I call “DAG
anxiety”—a fear that if one gets any part of the causal
assumptions wrong, then the output of the analysis becomes
wrong. Fortunately, we don’t need to get all the assumptions
right; we only need to rely on the assumptions required to
identify our selected estimand.
This is what makes DoWhy’s identify_effect method so
powerful. By showing us the assumptions required for each
estimand it lists, we can compare these assumptions and
target the estimand where we are most confident about
those assumptions.
For example, the key assumption behind the backdoor
adjustment estimand is that we can adjust for all sources of
confounding from common causes. In our original DAG, we
have an edge from Time Spent Playing to Player Skill Level.
What if you weren’t sure about the direction of this edge, as
illustrated in figure 11.6.

Figure 11.6 Uncertainty about the edge between Time Spent Playing
and Player Skill Level doesn’t matter with respect to the backdoor
adjustment estimand of the ATE of interest.
When we initially built the DAG, you might have been
thinking that playing more causes skill level to increase. But
now you may worry that perhaps the relationship is the other
way around—that being more skilled causes you to want to
spend more time playing. It doesn’t matter! At least, not with
respect to the backdoor estimand for the target query—the
ATE of Side-Quest Engagement on In-Game Purchases.
Suppose that instead you were worried that the model might
have omitted edges that reflect direct influence that Prior
Experience has on Side-Quest Engagement and In-Game
Purchases. You worry that players might bring their habits in
side-quest playing and virtual item purchasing from previous
games they’ve played to the game environment you are
modeling, as in figure 11.7.

Figure 11.7 Direct influence of a latent variable on the treatment and
outcome would violate the assumption underpinning the backdoor
adjustment estimand. If you are not confident in an estimand’s
assumptions, target another.
If this is true, your backdoor adjustment estimand
assumption would be violated—you would have a confounder
you couldn’t adjust for, a backdoor path you couldn’t block.
In this case, you’ll need to consider whether the backdoor
adjustment estimand is the right estimand to target.
Fortunately, in this example, we still have two other
estimands to choose from. Neither the instrumental variable
estimand nor the front-door adjustment estimand rely on our
ability to adjust for all common causes. As long as we’re
comfortable with the assumptions for either of these
estimands, we can continue.

11.3.5 When you don’t have identification
The stop sign in the causal inference workflow, shown again
in figure 11.8, warns against proceeding with estimation
when you don’t have identification.
Figure 11.8 If you lack identification, do not proceed to estimation.
Rather, consider how to acquire data that enables identification.
Let’s consider what happens if our observational distribution
only contains a subset of our initial variables, as in figure
11.9.

Figure 11.9 Player Skill Level, Won Items, Prior Experience, Side-Quest
Group Assignment, and Customization Level become latent variables.
In this case, we have some problems:
If Player Skill Level is latent, we can’t adjust for
confounding from Player Skill Level and thus have no
backdoor estimand.
If Won Items is latent, we can’t identify a front-door
estimand.
If the instrumental variables are latent, we can’t target
an instrumental variable estimand.
When you lack identification, you should not proceed with
the next step of estimation. Rather, use the results from
identification to determine what additional variables to
collect—consider how you can collect new data with

Additional confounders that would enable backdoor
identification
A mediator that would enable front-door identification
Variables you can use as instruments
Avoid the temptation to change the DAG to get identification
with your current data—you are modeling the data
generating process (DGP), not the data.
However, if you do have an identified estimand, you can
move on to step 4—estimation.
11.4 Step 4: Estimate the estimand
In step 4 of the causal inference workflow, we select an
estimation method for whichever estimand we wish to
target. In this section, we’ll walk through several estimators
for each of our three estimands. Note that your results for
estimation may vary slightly from those in the text,
depending on modifications to the dataset and to random
elements of the estimator.
In DoWhy, we do estimation using a method in the
CausalModel class called estimate_effect, as in the following
example.
Listing 11.5 Estimating the backdoor estimand with linear regression
causal_estimate_reg = model.estimate_effect(
    identified_estimand,    #1
    method_name="backdoor.linear_regression",  #2
    confidence_intervals=True    #3
)
#1 The estimate_effect method takes the output of the identify_effect
method as input.
#2 method_name is of the form “[estimand].[estimator]”. Here we use
the linear regression estimator to estimate the backdoor estimand.
#3 Return confidence intervals

The first argument is the identified_estimand object. The
second argument method_name is a string of the form "
[estimand].[estimator]", where "[estimand]" is the estimand we
want to target, and "[estimator]" is the estimation method we
want to use. Thus, method_name="backdoor.linear_regression"
means we want to use linear regression to estimate the
backdoor estimand.
In this section, we’ll see the benefits of distinguishing
identification from estimation. In step 3 of the causal
inference workflow, we compared identified estimands and
selected an estimand with assumptions in which we are
confident. That step frees us to focus on the statistical and
computational trade-offs common across data science and
machine learning when we choose an estimation method in
step 4. We’ll walk through these trade-offs in this section.
Let’s start by looking at the linear regression estimation of
the backdoor estimand.
11.4.1 Linear regression estimation of the
backdoor estimand
In many causal inference texts, particularly from
econometrics, the default approach to causal inference is
regression—specifically, regressing the outcome on the
treatment and any confounders we wish to adjust for or
“control for.” What we are doing in this case is using linear
regression to estimate the backdoor estimand.
Recall that in the case where Side-Quest Engagement is
continuous, the ATE would be

This is a function of x, not a point value. However, it
becomes a point value when E (I E=x ) is linear—the derivative
of a linear function is a constant.
So we turn to regression. The backdoor adjustment estimand
identifies Guild Membership (G  ), Time Spent Playing (T  ),
and Player Skill Level (S  ) as the confounders we have to
adjust for. In general, we have to sum or integrate over these
variables in the backdoor adjustment estimand. But in the
linear regression case, this simplifies to simply regressing I
on the treatment E and the confounders G, T, and S. The
coefficient estimate for E is the ATE. In the case of a binary
treatment like our target ATE,
E (IE=1 – I E= 0 )
we simply treat E as a regression dummy variable. The
coefficient estimates for the confounders are nuisance
parameters—meaning they are necessary to estimate the
ATE, but we can discard them once we have it.
To illustrate, let’s print the results of our call to
estimate_method.
Listing 11.6 Print the linear regression estimation results
print(causal_estimate_reg)
This prints a bunch of stuff, including the following:
## Realized estimand
b: In-game Purchases~Side-quest Engagement+Guild Membership+Time Spent Playing+Player 
Skill Level
Target units: ate
## Estimate
Mean value: 178.08617115757784
95.0% confidence interval: [[168.68114922 187.4911931 ]]
Realized estimand shows the regression formula. Estimate
shows the estimation results, the point value, and the 95%

confidence interval.
Here we see why linear regression is so popular as an
estimator:
The coefficient estimate of the treatment is a point
estimate of the ATE.
We adjust for backdoor confounders by simply including
them in the regression model (no summation, no
integration).
The statistical properties of the estimator (confidence
intervals, p-values, etc.) are well established.
Many people are familiar with regression and how to
evaluate a regression fit.
Once we have backdoor identification, the question of
whether we should use a linear regression estimator in this
case involves the same considerations of whether a linear
regression model is appropriate in non-causal explanatory
modeling settings (e.g., is the relationship linear?).

VALID BACKDOOR ADJUSTMENT SETS: WHAT YOU CAN AND CAN’T
ADJUST FOR
You do not need to adjust for all confounding from common
causes. Any valid backdoor adjustment set of common
causes will do. As discussed in chapter 10, a valid
backdoor adjustment set any set that satisfies the
backdoor criterion, meaning that it d-separates all
backdoor paths. For example, Guild Membership, Time
Spent Playing, and Player Skill Level are a valid adjustment
set. You don’t need Prior Experience because Time Spent
Playing and Player Skill Level are sufficient to d-separate
the backdoor path through Prior Experience. This is
fortunate for us, since Prior Experience is unobserved.
Though, if it were observed, we could add it to the
adjustment set—this superset would also be a valid set.
DoWhy selects a valid adjustment set when it identifies a
backdoor estimand. If you write your own estimator, you’ll
select your own adjustment set.
Some applied regression texts argue that you should try to
adjust for or “control for” any covariates in your data
because they could be potential confounders. This is bad
advice. Doing so only makes sense if you are sure the
covariate is not a mediator or a collider between the
treatment and outcome variables. Adjusting for a mediator
will d-separate the causal path you mean to quantify with
the ATE. Adjusting for a collider will add collider bias. This
is a painfully common error in social science, one
committed even by experts.

11.4.2 Propensity score estimators of the
backdoor estimand
Propensity score methods are a collection of estimation
methods for the backdoor estimand that use a quantity
called the propensity score. The traditional definition of a
propensity score is the probability of being exposed to the
treatment conditional on the confounders. In the context of
the online gaming example, this is the probability that a
player has high Side-Quest Engagement given their Guild
Membership, Time Spent Playing, and Player Skill Level, i.e.,
P (E  = 1|T  = t, G  = g, S  = s ) where t, g, and s are that
player’s values for T, G, and S. In other words, it quantifies
the player’s “propensity” of being exposed to the treatment
(E  = 1). Typically P (E  = 1|T  = t, G  = g, S  = s ) is fit by logistic
regression.
But we can take a more expansive, machine learning–
friendly view of the propensity score. We can learn a
propensity score function λ(...) of the backdoor adjustment
set of confounders that renders those confounders
conditionally independent of the treatment, as in figure
11.10.

Figure 11.10 The propensity score is a compression of the causal
influence of the common causes in the backdoor adjustment set.
Here, we learn a function λ(T, S, G ) such that it effectively
compresses the explanatory influence that T, S, and G have
on E. The traditional function of P (E  = 1|G, S, T ) compresses
this influence into a probability value, but other approaches
can work as well.
The utility of propensity score modeling is dimensionality
reduction; now we only need to adjust for the score instead
of all the confounders in the adjustment set. There are three
common propensity score methods:
Propensity score stratification
Propensity score matching
Propensity score weighting
These methods make different trade-offs in how they go
about backdoor adjustment. Let’s examine their use in

DoWhy.
PROPENSITY SCORE STRATIFICATION
Propensity score stratification tries to break the data up into
subsets (“strata”) according to propensity scores and then
adjust over the strata. Note that this algorithm may take
some time to run.
Listing 11.7 Propensity score stratification
causal_estimate_strat = model.estimate_effect(
    identified_estimand,
    method_name="backdoor.propensity_score_stratification",     #1
    target_units="ate",
    confidence_intervals=True
)
print(causal_estimate_strat)
#1 Propensity score stratification
This produces the following results:
## Estimate
Mean value: 187.2931023294184
95.0% confidence interval: (180.3291962554186, 196.4556029137768)
The propensity score estimator gives us an estimate and
confidence interval that differ slightly from that of the
regression estimator.
PROPENSITY SCORE MATCHING
Propensity score matching tries to match individuals where
treatment = 1 with individuals that have a similar propensity
score but where treatment = 0 and then compare outcomes
across matched pairs.

Listing 11.8 Propensity score matching
causal_estimate_match = model.estimate_effect(
    identified_estimand,
    method_name="backdoor.propensity_score_matching",     #1
    target_units="ate",
    confidence_intervals=True
)
print(causal_estimate_match)
#1 Propensity score matching
This returns the following results:
## Estimate
Mean value: 199.8110290000004
95.0% confidence interval: (183.23361900000054, 210.5281390000008)
Propensity score matching, despite also being a propensity
score method, returns an estimate and confidence interval
different from that of propensity score stratification.
PROPENSITY SCORE WEIGHTING
Propensity score weighting methods use the propensity
score to calculate a weight in a class of inference algorithms
called inverse probability weighting. We implement this
method in DoWhy as follows.
Listing 11.9 Propensity score weighting
causal_estimate_ipw = model.estimate_effect(
    identified_estimand,
    method_name="backdoor.propensity_score_weighting",    #1
    target_units = "ate",
    method_params={"weighting_scheme":"ips_weight"},    #2
    confidence_intervals=True
)
print(causal_estimate_ipw)
#1 Inverse probability weighting with the propensity score
#2 Parameters used to set the IPS algorithm
This returns the following:
## Estimate
Mean value: 437.79246624944926
95.0% confidence interval: (358.10472302821745, 515.2480572854872)

The fact that this estimator’s result differs so dramatically
from the others suggest that it is relying on statistical
assumptions that don’t hold in this data.
Next, we’ll move on to a popular class of backdoor
estimators that implement machine learning.
11.4.3 Backdoor estimation with machine
learning
Recent developments in causal effect estimation focus on
leveraging machine learning models, and most of these
target the backdoor estimand. These approaches to causal
effect estimation scale to large datasets and allow us to
relax parametric assumptions, such as linearity. The
following DoWhy code uses the sklearn and EconML libraries
for these machine learning methods. DoWhy’s
estimate_effects provides a wrapper to the EconML
implementation of these methods.
DOUBLE MACHINE LEARNING
Double machine learning (double ML) is a backdoor
estimator that uses machine learning methods to fit two
predictive models: a model of the outcome, given the
adjustment set of confounders, and a model of the
treatment, given the adjustment set. The approach then
combines these two predictive models in a final-stage
estimation to create a model of the target causal effect
query.
The following code performs double ML using a gradient
boosting model and regularized regression model (LassoCV)
from sklearn.

Listing 11.10 Double ML with DoWhy, EconML, and sklearn
from sklearn.preprocessing import PolynomialFeatures
from sklearn.linear_model import LassoCV
from sklearn.ensemble import GradientBoostingRegressor
featurizer = PolynomialFeatures(degree=1, include_bias=False)
gb_estimate = model.estimate_effect(
    identified_estimand,
    method_name = "backdoor.econml.dml.DML",     #1
    control_value = 0,
    treatment_value = 1,
    method_params={
        "init_params":{
            'model_y': GradientBoostingRegressor(),    #2
            'model_t': GradientBoostingRegressor(),    #3
            'model_final': LassoCV(fit_intercept=False),     #4
            'featurizer': featurizer 
        },
        "fit_params":{}
    }
)
print(gb_estimate)
#1 Select the double ML estimator.
#2 Use a gradient boosting model to model the outcome given the
confounders.
#3 Use a gradient boosting model to model the treatment given the
confounders.
#4 Use linear regression with L1 regularization (LASSO) as the final
model.
This produces the following output:
## Estimate
Mean value: 175.7229947190752
This gives us an estimate in the ballpark of some of the other
estimators.
META LEARNERS
Meta learners are another ML method for backdoor
estimation. Broadly speaking, meta learners train a model
(or models) of the outcome given the treatment variable and
the confounders, and then account for the difference in
prediction across treatment and control values of the
treatment variable. They are particularly focused on
highlighting heterogeneity of treatment effects across the

data. The following code shows a meta learner example
called a T-learner that uses a random forest predictor.
Listing 11.11 Backdoor estimation with a meta learner
from sklearn.ensemble import RandomForestRegressor     #1
metalearner_estimate = model.estimate_effect(   #1
    identified_estimand,   #1
    method_name="backdoor.econml.metalearners.TLearner",   #1
    method_params={   #1
        "init_params": {'models': RandomForestRegressor()},    #1
        "fit_params": {}    #1
    }    #1
)    #1
print(metalearner_estimate)
#1 Meta learner estimation of the backdoor estimand. This uses a T-
learner with a random forest predictor.
This returns the following output:
## Estimate
Mean value: 197.20665049459512
Effect estimates: [[ 192.6234]
 [  -5.3165]
 [ 133.2457]
 ...
 [  17.2561]
 [-152.1482]
 [ 264.887 ]]
The values under “Effect estimates” are the estimate of the
CATE for each row of the data, conditional on the confounder
values in the columns of that row.
CONFIDENCE INTERVALS WITH MACHINE LEARNING
METHODS
DoWhy and EconML provide support for estimating
confidence intervals for ML methods using a statistical
method called nonparametric bootstrap, but this is
computationally costly for large data. Cheap confidence
interval estimation is one thing you give up for the flexibility
and scalability of using ML methods for backdoor estimation.

11.4.4 Front-door estimation
Recall from chapter 10 that the front-door estimator for our
ATE, given our Won Items mediator, is
We can estimate this by fitting two statistical models, one
that predicts W given E, and one that predicts I given E and
W. DoWhy does this with linear regression by default, but
you also have the option of selecting different predictive
models.
Listing 11.12 Front door estimation with DoWhy
causal_estimate_fd = model.estimate_effect(
    identified_estimand,
    method_name="frontdoor.two_stage_regression",     #1
    target_units = "ate",
    method_params={"weighting_scheme": "ips_weight"},     #2
    confidence_intervals=True
)
print(causal_estimate_fd)
#1 Select two-stage regression for the front-door estimand.
#2 Specify estimator hyperparameters.
This produces the following output:
## Estimate
Mean value: 170.20560581290403
95.0% confidence interval: (141.53468188231938, 202.97221450388332)
The front-door estimate is similar to some of the backdoor
estimators, but note that the confidence interval is skewed
left.
11.4.5 Instrumental variable methods
Instrumental variable-based estimation of the ATE is
straightforward in DoWhy.

Listing 11.13 Instrumental variable estimation in DoWhy
causal_estimate_iv = model.estimate_effect(
    identified_estimand,
    method_name="iv.instrumental_variable",    #1
    method_params = {
        "iv_instrument_name": "Side-quest Group Assignment"   #2
    },
    confidence_intervals=True
)
print(causal_estimate_iv)
#1 Select instrumental variable estimation.
#2 Select side-quest engagement as the instrument.
This prints the following output:
## Estimate
Mean value: 205.82297621514252
95.0% confidence interval: (-369.04011492007703, 923.6814756173349)
Note how large the confidence interval is despite the size of
the data. This indicates that this estimator, with its default
assumptions, might have too much variance to be useful.
GOOD INSTRUMENTAL VARIABLES SHOULD BE “STRONG”
One requirement for good instrumental variable estimation
is that the instrument is strong, meaning it has a strong
causal effect on the treatment variable. If you explore this
data, you’ll find Side-Quest Group Assignment is a weak
instrument. Weak instruments can lead to high variance
estimates of the ATE. Keep this in mind when selecting an
instrument.
REGRESSION DISCONTINUITY
Regression discontinuity is an estimation method popular in
econometrics. It uses a continuously valued variable related
to the treatment variable, and it defines a threshold (a
“discontinuity”) in the values of that variable that partition

the data into “treatment” and “control” groups. It then
compares observations lying closely on either side of the
threshold, because those data points tend to have similar
values for the confounders.
DoWhy treats regression discontinuity as an instrumental
variable approach that uses continuous instruments. The
rd_variable_name argument names a continuous instrument to
use for thresholding, and rd_threshold_value is the threshold
value. rd_bandwidth is the distance from the threshold within
which confounders can be considered the same between
treatment and control.
Listing 11.14 Regression discontinuity estimation with DoWhy
causal_estimate_regdist = model.estimate_effect(
    identified_estimand,
    method_name="iv.regression_discontinuity",    #1
    method_params={
        'rd_variable_name':'Customization Level',    #2
        'rd_threshold_value':0.5,     #3
        'rd_bandwidth': 0.15     #4
    },
    confidence_intervals=True,
)
#1 DoWhy treats regression discontinuity as a special type of IV
estimator.
#2 Use Customization Level as our instrument.
#3 The threshold value for the split (“discontinuity”)
#4 The distance from the threshold within which confounders are
considered the same between treatment and control values of the
treatment variable
This returns the following results:
Mean value: 156.85691281931338
95.0% confidence interval: (-463.32687612531663, 940.698188663685)
Again, the variance is too large for us to rely on this
estimator. The instrument is likely weak, or we need to tune
the arguments passed to the estimator.

CONDITIONAL AVERAGE TREATMENT EFFECT ESTIMATION AND
SEGMENTATION
The conditional average treatment effect (CATE) is the ATE
for a subset of the target population; i.e., we condition the
ATE on specific values of covariates. DoWhy enables you to
estimate the CATE as easily as the ATE.
Sometimes the goal of CATE estimation is segmentation—
breaking the population down into segments that have a
distinct CATE from other segments. A good tool for
segmentation is EconML, which enables CATE-
segmentation using regression trees. EconML can segment
data into groups that respond similarly to intervention on
the treatment variable, and find an optimal intervention
value for each group in the leaf nodes of the regression
tree.
11.4.6 Comparing and selecting estimators
In chapter 1, I mentioned a phenomenon called the
commodification of inference. The way DoWhy reduces
estimation to merely a set of arguments passed to the
estimate_effect method is an example of this phenomenon.
You don’t need a detailed understanding of the estimator to
get going. Once you’ve selected the estimand you wish to
target, you can switch out different estimators.

ADVICE: START WITH SYNTHETIC DATA
One excellent practice is to build your workflow on
synthetic data, rather than real data. Simulate a synthetic
dataset that matches the size and correlation structure of
your data, as well as your causal and statistical
assumptions about your data. For example, you can write a
causal generative model of your data, and use your data to
train its parameters. Using this model as ground truth,
simulate some data and derive a ground truth ATE.
You can then see if DoWhy’s estimates get close to the
ground truth ATE, and if its confidence intervals contain it.
You can also see how well the estimators perform under
the ideal conditions where all your assumptions are true—
even in these conditions, the estimates will have biases
and uncertainty.
Once you debug any problems that arise in these ideal
conditions, you can switch out the synthetic data for real
data. Then, the problems that arise are likely due to
incorrect assumptions, and you can treat these by
revisiting your assumptions.
My suggestion is to compare estimators after adding the
next step, refutation, to the workflow. Refutation will help
you stress test both the causal assumptions in the estimand
and the statistical assumptions in the estimator. This enables
you to make empirical comparisons of different estimators.
Then, once you know what estimator you want and have
seen how it performs on your data, you can do a deep dive
into the statistical nuts and bolts of your chosen estimator.

11.5 Step 5: Refutation
We know that the result of our causal inference depends on
our initial causal assumptions in step 2, or more specifically,
the subset of those assumptions we rely on for identification
in step 3. In step 4, we select an estimator that makes its
own statistical assumptions. What if those causal and
statistical assumptions are wrong?
We can address this in step 5 with refutation, where we
actively search for evidence that our analysis is faulty. We
first saw this concept in chapter 4, when we saw how to
refute the causal DAG by finding statistical evidence of
dependence in the data that conflicts with the conditional
independence implications of the causal DAG. In section
7.6.2, we saw how to refute a model by finding cases where
its predicted intervention outcomes clash with real-world
intervention outcomes. Here, we implement refutation as a
type of sensitivity analysis that tries to refute the various
assumptions underpinning an estimate by simulating
violations to those assumptions.
The CausalModel class in DoWhy has a refute_estimate method
that provides a suite of refuters we can run. Each refuter
provides a different attack vector for our assumptions. The
refuters we run with refute_estimate perform a simulation-
based statistical test; the null hypothesis is that the
assumptions are not refuted, and the alternative hypothesis
is that the assumptions are refuted. The tests return a p-
value. If we take a standard significance threshold of .05 and
the p-value falls below this threshold, we conclude that our
assumptions are refuted.
In this section, we’ll investigate a few of DoWhy’s refuters
with various estimands and estimators.

11.5.1 Data size reduction
One way to test the robustness of the analysis is to reduce
the size of the data and see if we obtain similar results. We
are assuming our analysis has more than enough data to
achieve a stable estimation. We can refute this assumption
by slightly reducing the size of the data and testing whether
we get a similar estimate. Let’s try this with the estimator of
the front-door estimand.
Listing 11.15 Refuting the assumption of sufficient data
identified_estimand.set_identifier_method("frontdoor")     #1
res_subset = model.refute_estimate(
    identified_estimand,     #2
    causal_estimate_fd,  #2
    method_name="data_subset_refuter",     #3
    subset_fraction=0.8,     #4
    num_simulations=100
)
print(res_subset)
#1 Not always necessary, but clarifying the estimand targeted by the
estimator we want to test can help avoid errors.
#2 The refute_estimate function takes in the identified estimand and
the estimator that targets the estimand.
#3 Select data_subset_refuter, which tests if the causal estimate is
different when we run the analysis on a subset of the data.
#4 Set the size of the subset to 80% the size of the original data.
This produces the following output (this is a random process
so your results will differ slightly):
Refute: Use a subset of data
Estimated effect:170.20560581290403
New effect:169.14858189323638
p value:0.82
The Estimated effect is the effect from our original analysis.
New effect is the average ATE across the simulations. We want
these two effects to be similar, because otherwise it would
mean that our analysis is sensitive to the amount of data we
have. The p-value here is above the threshold, so we failed
to refute this assumption.

11.5.2 Adding a dummy confounder
One way to test our models is to add dummy common-cause
confounders. If a variable is not a confounder, it has no
bearing on the true ATE, so we assume that our causal effect
estimation workflow will be unaffected by these variables. In
truth, additional variables might add statistical noise that
throws off our estimator.
The following listing attempts to refute the assumption that
such noise does not affect the double ML estimator of the
backdoor estimand.
Listing 11.16 Adding a dummy confounder
identified_estimand.set_identifier_method("backdoor")
res_random = model.refute_estimate(    #1
    identified_estimand,     #1
    gb_estimate,    #1
    method_name="random_common_cause",    #1
    num_simulations=100,    #1
)    #1
print(res_random)
#1 Runs 100 simulations of the addition of a dummy confounder to the
model
This returns output such as the following:
Refute: Add a random common cause
Estimated effect:175.2192519976428
New effect:176.59119763647792
p value:0.30000000000000004
Again, Estimated effect is the original causal effect estimate,
and New effect is the new causal effect estimate obtained
after adding a random common cause to the data and re-
running the analysis. The dummy variable has no real effect,
so we expect the ATE to be the same. Again, the p-value is
above the significance threshold, so we failed to refute our
assumptions.

11.5.3 Replacing treatment with a dummy
We can also experiment with replacing the treatment
variable with a dummy variable. This is analogous to giving
our causal effect inference workflow a “placebo,” and seeing
how much causality it ascribes to this fake treatment. Since
this dummy variable will have no effect on the treatment, we
expect the ATE to be 0.
Let’s try this with our inverse probability weighting estimator.
Listing 11.17 Replacing the treatment variable with a dummy variable
identified_estimand.set_identifier_method("backdoor")
res_placebo = model.refute_estimate(
identified_estimand,     #1
    causal_estimate_ipw,     #1
    method_name="placebo_treatment_refuter",     #1
    placebo_type="permute",     #1
    num_simulations=100     #1
)
print(res_placebo)
#1 This refuter replaces the treatment variable with a dummy (placebo)
variable.
This produces the following output:
Refute: Use a Placebo Treatment
Estimated effect:437.79246624944926
New effect:-531.2490111208127
p value:0.0
In this case, the p-value is calculated under the null
hypothesis that New effect is equal to 0. Again, a low p-value
would refute our assumptions.
In this case, it would seem that our inverse probability
weighting estimator was thrown off by this refuter. This result
indicates that there is an issue somewhere in the joint
assumptions made by the backdoor estimand and this
estimator. If we then used this refuter with other backdoor
estimators and they were not refuted, we would have

narrowed down the source of the issue to the statistical
assumptions made by this estimator.
11.5.4 Replacing outcome with a dummy
outcome
We can substitute the outcome variable with a dummy
variable. The ATE in this case should be 0, because the
treatment has no effect on this dummy. We’ll simulate it as a
linear function of some of the confounders so the outcome
still has a meaningful relationship with some of the
covariates.
Let’s try this with the front door estimator.
Listing 11.18 Replacing the outcome variable with a dummy variable
import numpy as np
coefficients = np.array([100.0, 50.0])
bias = 50.0
def linear_gen(df):      #1
    subset = df[['guild_membership','player_skill_level']]    #1
    y_new = np.dot(subset.values, coefficients) + bias    #1
    return y_new     #1
ref = model.refute_estimate(    #2
    identified_estimand,     #2
    causal_estimate_fd,    #2
    method_name="dummy_outcome_refuter",    #2
    outcome_function=linear_gen     #2
)     #2
res_dummy_outcome = ref[0]
print(res_dummy_outcome)
Refute: Use a Dummy Outcome
Estimated effect:0
New effect:-0.024480394297227835
p value:0.86
#1 Create a function that generates a new dummy outcome variable as
a linear function of the covariates.
#2 Runs refute_estimate with a dummy outcome refuter
Again, the p-value is calculated under the null hypothesis
that New effect equals 0, and a low p-value refutes our
assumptions. In this case, our assumptions are not refuted.

Next, we’ll evaluate the sensitivity of the analysis to
unobserved confounding.
11.5.5 Testing robustness to unmodeled
confounders
Our backdoor adjustment estimand assumes that the
adjustment set blocks all backdoor paths. If there were a
confounder that we failed to adjust for, that assumption is
violated, and our estimate would have a confounder bias.
That is not necessarily the worst thing; if we adjust for all the
major confounders, bias from unknown confounders might
be small and not impact our results by much. On the other
hand, missing a major confounder could lead us to conclude
that there is a nonzero ATE when one doesn’t exist, or
conclude a positive ATE when the true ATE is negative, or
vice versa. We can therefore test how robust our analysis is
to the introduction of latent confounders that our model
failed to capture. The hope is that the new estimate does not
change drastically when we introduce some modest
influence from a newly introduced confounder.
Listing 11.19 Adding an unobserved confounder
identified_estimand.set_identifier_method("backdoor")
res_unobserved = model.refute_estimate(     #1
    identified_estimand,    #1
    causal_estimate_fd,     #1
    method_name="add_unobserved_common_cause"    #1
)
print(res_unobserved)
#1 Setting up a refuter that adds an unobserved common cause
This code does not return a p-value. It produces the heatmap
we see in figure 11.11, showing how quickly the estimate
changes when the unobserved confounder assumption is
violated. The horizontal axis shows the various levels of
influence the unobserved confounder has on the outcome,
and the vertical axis shows the various levels of influence

the confounder can have on the treatment. The color
corresponds to the new effect estimates that result at
different levels of influence.


Figure 11.11 A heatmap illustrating the effects of adding an unobserved
confounder on the ATE estimate
The code also prints out the following.
Refute: Add an Unobserved Common Cause
Estimated effect:187.2931023294184
New effect:(-181.5795321684548, 398.98672237350416)
Here, we see that the ATE is quite sensitive to the effect the
confounder has on the treatment. Note that you can change
the default parameters of the refuter to experiment with
different impacts the confounder could have on the
treatment and outcome.
Now that we’ve run through a full workflow in DoWhy, let’s
explore how we’d build a similar workflow using the tools of
probabilistic machine learning.
11.6 Causal inference with causal
generative models
At the end of chapter 10, we calculated an ATE using the do
intervention operator and a probabilistic inference algorithm.
This is a powerful universal approach to doing causal
inference that leverages cutting-edge probabilistic machine
learning. But this wasn’t estimation. Estimation requires
data. It would be estimation if we estimated the model
parameters from data before running that workflow with the
do function and probabilistic inference.
In this section, we’ll run through a full ATE estimation
workflow that uses the do intervention operator and
probabilistic inference. We used MCMC for the probabilistic
inference step in chapter 10, but here we’ll use variational
inference with a variational autoencoder to handle latent
variables in the data. Further, we’ll use a Bayesian
estimation approach, meaning we’ll assign prior probabilistic

distributions to the parameters. The ATE inference step with
the intervention operator will depend on sampling from the
posterior distribution on parameters.
The advantage of this approach relative to using DoWhy is
being able to use modern deep learning tools to work with
latent variables as well as use Bayesian modeling to address
uncertainty. Further, this approach will work in cases of
causal identification that are not covered by DoWhy (e.g.,
edge cases of graphical identification, identification derived
from assignment functions or prior distributions, partial
identification, etc.).
This approach to ATE estimation is a specific case of a
general approach to causal inference where we train a
causal graphical model, transform the model in some way
that reflects the causal query (e.g., with an intervention
operator), and then run a probabilistic inference algorithm.
Let’s review various ways we can transform a model for
causal inference.
11.6.1 Transformations for causal inference
We have seen several ways of modifying a causal model
such that it can readily infer a causal query. We’ll call these
“transformations”: we transform our model into a new model
that targets a causal inference query. Let’s review the
transformations we’ve seen so far.
GRAPH SURGERY
One of the transformations was basic graph surgery,
illustrated in figure 11.12. This operation implements an
ideal intervention, setting the intervention target to a
constant and severing the causal influence from the parents.
This operation allows us to use our model to infer P (IE=1 ),

the ATE, and similar level 2 queries, and it’s how we have
been implementing interventions in pgmpy.
Figure 11.12 Graph surgery is a transformation that implements an
ideal intervention by removing incoming causal influence on the target
node and setting the target node to a constant.
We implemented graph surgery in pgmpy by using the do
method on the BayesianNetwork class, and then we added a
hack that modified the TabularCPD object assigned to the
intervention project so that the intervention value had a
probability of 1.
PyMC is a probabilistic programming language similar to
Pyro. It does implicit graph surgery by transforming the logic
of the model. For example, PyMC might specify E, a function
of G, as E = Bernoulli("E", p=f(G)). PyMC uses a do function to
implement the intervention, as in do(model, {"E": 1.0}). Under
the hood, this function does implicit graph surgery by
effectively replacing E = Bernoulli("E", p=f(G)) with E = 1.0.
NODE-SPLITTING
In chapter 10, we discussed a slightly nuanced version of
graph surgery called a node-splitting operation, illustrated in
figure 11.13. Node-splitting converts the graph to a single
world intervention graph, allowing us to infer level 2 queries

just as graph surgery does. It also allows us to infer level 3
queries where the factual conditions and hypothetical
outcome don’t overlap, such as P (IE= 0 |E   = 1) (though doing
so relies on an additional “single world assumption,” as
discussed in chapter 10).
Figure 11.13 The node-splitting transform splits the intervention target
into a constant that keeps the children and a random variable that
keeps the parents.
Pyro’s do function implements node-splitting (though it
behaves just like PyMC’s do function if you don’t target level
3 queries).
MULTI-WORLD TRANSFORMATION
We also saw how to transform a structural causal model into
a parallel world graph. Let’s call this a multi-world
transformation, illustrated in figure 11.14.

Figure 11.14 Yet another transform converts the model into a parallel-
world model.
We created parallel-world models by hand in chapter 9 with
pgmpy and Pyro. The y0 library produces parallel world
graphs from DAGs. ChiRho, the causal library that extends
Pyro, has a TwinWorldCounterfactual handler that does the
multi-world transformation.
TRANSFORMATION TO A COUNTERFACTUAL GRAPH
Recall that we can also transform the causal DAG to a
counterfactual graph (which, in the case of a level 2 query
like P (IE= 1), will simplify to the result of graph surgery). Y0
creates a counterfactual graph from your DAG and a given
query. Future versions of causal probabilistic ML libraries may
provide the same transformation for a Pyro/PyMC/ChiRho
type model.

11.6.2 Steps for inferring a causal query with a
causal generative model
Given a causal generative model and a target causal query,
we have two steps to infer the target query: first, apply the
transformation, and then run probabilistic inference.
We did this with the online gaming example at the end of
chapter 10. We targeted P (IE= 0) and P (IE= 0 |E   = 1). For each
of these queries, we used the do function in Pyro to modify
the model to represent the intervention E  = 0. In the case of
P (IE= 0 |E   = 1), we also conditioned on E   = 1. Then we ran
an MCMC algorithm to generate samples from these
distributions. We also used the probabilistic inference with
parallel-world graphs to implement level 3 counterfactual
inferences in chapter 9.
11.6.3 Extending inference to estimation
To extend this workflow to estimation, like the DoWhy
methods in this chapter, we simply need to add a parameter
estimation step to our causal graphical inference workflow:
1. Estimate model parameters.
2. Apply the transformation.
3. Run probabilistic inference on the transformed model.
Let’s look at how to do this with the online game data. For
simplicity, we’ll work with a reduced model that drops the
instruments and the collider, since we won’t be using them.
We’ll model the causal Markov kernels of each node with
some unique parameter vector. We can estimate the
parameters any way we like, but to stay on brand with
probabilistic reasoning, let’s use a Bayesian setup, treating
each parameter vector as its own random variable with its

own prior probability distribution. Figure 11.15 illustrates a
plate model representation of the causal DAG (we discussed
plate model visualizations in chapter 2), drawing these
random variables as new nodes, using Greek letters to
highlight the fact that they are parameters, rather than
causal components of the real world DGP.
Figure 11.15 A plate model of the causal DAG with new nodes
representing parameters associated with each causal Markov kernel.
There is a single plate with N identical and independent observations in
the training data. θ corresponds to parameters, which are outside the
plate, because the parameters are the same for each of the N data
points.
In this case, Bayesian estimation will target the posterior
distribution:

where 
 each represent the N examples of E, Y, T,
G, S, W, I in the data.
Estimating the θs in this case is easy. For example, in pgmpy
we just run model.fit(data, estimator= BayesianEstimator, ...),
where “. . .” contains arguments that specify the type of
prior to assign the θs. Pgmpy uses the posterior to give us
point estimates of the θs. In Pyro, we just write sample
statements for the θs and use one of Pyro’s various inference
algorithms to get samples from the posterior.
But the causal effect methods in DoWhy highlight the ability
to do causal inferences when some causal variables are
latent, such as confounders:
Backdoor adjustment with some latent confounders is
possible (e.g., Prior Experience) if you have a valid
adjustment set (Time Spent Playing, Guild Membership,
and Player Skill Level).
If too many confounders are latent, such that you do not
have 
backdoor 
adjustment, 
you 
can 
use 
other
techniques, such as using instrumental variables and
front-door adjustment.
So for causal generative modeling to compete with DoWhy, it
needs to accommodate latent variables. Let’s consider the
case where the backdoor adjustment estimand is not
identified. Next, we’ll explore how we can train a latent
causal generative model and then apply the transformation
and probabilistic inference.
In this model, we’ll assume that Guild Membership is the
only observed confounder, as in figure 11.16. In this case, we
no longer have backdoor identification.

Figure 11.16 Guild Membership is the only observed confounder, so the
backdoor estimand is not identified.
SETTING UP YOUR ENVIRONMENT
The following code is written with torch 2.2, pandas 1.5,
and pyro-ppl 1.9. We’ll use matplotlib and seaborn for
plotting.
Let’s first reload and modify the data to reflect this paucity of
observed variables.

Listing 11.20 Load and reduce data to a subset of observed variables
import pandas as pd
import torch
url = ("https://raw.githubusercontent.com/altdeep/"    #1
       "causalML/master/datasets/online_game_ate.csv")    #1
df = pd.read_csv(url)     #1
df = df[["Guild Membership", "Side-quest Engagement",   #2
         "Won Items", "In-game Purchases"]]  #2
device = torch.device("cuda" if torch.cuda.is_available() else "cpu")     #3
data = {   #3
    col: torch.tensor(df[col].values, dtype=torch.float32).to(device)    #3
    for col in df.columns  #3
}   #3
#1 Load the data.
#2 Drop everything but Guild Membership, Side-Quest Engagement,
Won Items, and In-Game Purchases.
#3 Convert the data to tensors and dynamically set the device for
performing tensor computations depending on the availability of a
CUDA-enabled GPU.
Now we are targeting the following posterior:
Targeting this posterior is harder because, since the
observations of 
 are not observed, they are not available
to help in inferring θY, θT, and θS. In fact, in general, θY, θT,
and θS are underdetermined, meaning multiple
configurations of {θY, θT, θS} would be equally likely given
the data. Further, we’ll have trouble estimating with θE and
θI because it will be hard to disentangle them from the other
latent variables.
But it doesn’t matter! At least, not in terms of our goal of
inferring P(IE=e), because we know we have identified the
front-door estimand of P(IE=e). In other words, the existence
of a front-door estimand proves we can infer P(IE=e) from the

observed variables regardless of the lack of identifiability of
some of the parameters.
11.6.4 A VAE-inspired model for causal
inference
We’ll make our modeling easier by creating proxy variables 
and θZ to stand in for {
} and {θY, θT, θS} respectively.
Collapsing the latent confounders into these proxies reduces
the dimensionality of the estimation problem, and any loss of
information that occurs from collapsing these variables won’t
matter because we are ultimately relying on information
flowing through the front door. We’ll create a causal
generative model inspired by the variational autoencoder,
where  is a latent encoding and θE and θI become weights
in decoders. This is visualized in figure 11.17.
Now our inference will target the posterior:
Our model will have two decoders. One decoder maps  and
G to E, returning a derived parameter ρ_engagement that acts
as the probability that Side-Quest Engagement is high. Let’s
call this network Confounders2Engagement. As shown in figure
11.17,  is a vector with K elements, but we’ll set K=1 for
simplicity.

Figure 11.17 VAE-inspired model where latent vector Z of length K
proxies for the latent confounders in figure 11.16

Listing 11.21 Specify Confounders2Engagement neural network
import torch.nn as nn
class Confounders2Engagement(nn.Module):
    def __init__(
        self,
        input_dim=1+1,    #1
        hidden_dim=5    #2
    ):
        super().__init__()
        self.fc1 = nn.Linear(input_dim, hidden_dim)    #3
        self.f_engagement_ρ = nn.Linear(hidden_dim, 1)     #4
        self.softplus = nn.Softplus()    #5
        self.sigmoid = nn.Sigmoid()     #6
    def forward(self, input):
        input = input.t()
        hidden = self.softplus(self.fc1(input))     #7
        ρ_engagement = self.sigmoid(self.f_engagement_ρ(hidden))    #8
        ρ_engagement = ρ_engagement.t().squeeze(0)
        return ρ_engagement
#1 Input is confounder proxy Z concatenated with Guild Membership.
#2 Choose a hidden dimension of width 5.
#3 Linear map from input to hidden dimension
#4 Linear map from hidden dimension to In-Game Purchases location
parameter
#5 Activation function for hidden layer
#6 Activation function for Side-Quest Engagement parameter
#7 From input to hidden layer
#8 From hidden layer to ρ_engagement
Next, let’s specify another neural net decoder that maps Z,
W, and G to a location and scale parameter for I . Let’s call
this PurchasesNetwork.

Listing 11.22 PurchasesNetwork neural network
class PurchasesNetwork(nn.Module):
    def __init__(
        self,
        input_dim=1+1+1,   #1
        hidden_dim=5    #2
    ):
        super().__init__()
        self.f_hidden = nn.Linear(input_dim, hidden_dim)    #3
        self.f_purchase_μ = nn.Linear(hidden_dim, 1)     #4
        self.f_purchase_σ = nn.Linear(hidden_dim, 1)     #5
        self.softplus = nn.Softplus()     #6
    def forward(self, input):
        input = input.t()
        hidden = self.softplus(self.f_hidden(input))     #7
        μ_purchases = self.f_purchase_μ(hidden)   H #8
        σ_purchases = 1e-6 + self.softplus(self.f_purchase_σ(hidden))    #9
        μ_purchases = μ_purchases.t().squeeze(0)
        σ_purchases = σ_purchases.t().squeeze(0)
        return μ_purchases, σ_purchases
#1 Input is confounder proxy Z concatenated with Guild Membership
and Won Items.
#2 Choose a hidden dimension of width 5.
#3 Linear map from input to hidden dimension
#4 Linear map from hidden dimension to In-Game Purchases location
parameter
#5 Linear map from hidden dimension to In-Game Purchases scale
parameter
#6 Activation for hidden layer
#7 From input to hidden layer
#8 Mapping from hidden layer to location parameter for purchases
#9 Mapping from hidden layer scale parameter for purchases. The 1e-6
lets us avoid scale values of 0.
Now we use both networks to specify the causal model. The
model will take a dictionary of parameters called params and
use them to sample the variables in the model. The Bernoulli
distributions of Guild Membership and Won Items have
parameters passed in a dictionary called params, with keys
ρ_member representing θG, and ρ_won_engaged and
ρ_won_not_engaged together representing θW. ρ_engagement,
which represents the Side-Quest Engagement parameter θE,
is set by the output of Confounders2Engagement, and μ_purchases
and σ_purchases, which jointly represent the In-Game
Purchases parameter θY, are the output of PurchaseNetwork.

The parameter set θZ is a location and scale parameter for a
normal distribution. Rather than a learnable θZ, I use fixed θZ
  =  {0, 1} and let the neural nets handle the linear transform
for Z.
Listing 11.23 Specify the causal model
from pyro import sample
from pyro.distributions import Bernoulli, Normal
from torch import tensor, stack
def model(params, device=device):     #1
    z_dist = Normal(    #2
        tensor(0.0, device=device),    #2
        tensor(1.0, device=device))     #2
    z = sample("Z", z_dist)   #2
    member_dist = Bernoulli(params['ρ_member'])    #3
    is_guild_member = sample("Guild Membership", member_dist)    #3
    engagement_input = stack((is_guild_member, z)).to(device)    #4
    ρ_engagement = confounders_2_engagement(engagement_input)    #4
    engage_dist = Bernoulli(ρ_engagement)
    is_highly_engaged = sample("Side-quest Engagement", engage_dist)     #5
    p_won = (     #6
        params['ρ_won_engaged'] * is_highly_engaged +     #6
        params['ρ_won_not_engaged'] * (1 - is_highly_engaged)     #6
    )    #6
    won_items = sample("Won Items", Bernoulli(p_won))     #6
    purchase_input = stack((won_items, is_guild_member, z)).to(device)     #7
    μ_purchases, σ_purchases = purchases_network(purchase_input)   #7
    purchase_dist = Normal(μ_purchases, σ_purchases)    #8
    in_game_purchases = sample("In-game Purchases", purchase_dist)   #8
#1 The causal model
#2 A latent variable that acts as a proxy for other confounders
#3 Whether someone is in a guild
#4 Use confounders_ 2_engagement to map is_guild_ member and z to a
parameter for Side-Quest Engagement and In-Game Purchases.
#5 Modeling Side-Quest Engagement
#6 Modeling amount of Won Items
#7 Use purchases_network to map is_guild_member, z, and won_items to
in_game_purchases.
#8 Model in_game_purchases.
This model represents a single data point. Now we need to
extend the model to every example data point in the
dataset. We’ll build a data_model that loads the neural
networks, assigns priors to the parameters, and models the
data.

Listing 11.24 Build a data model
import pyro
from pyro import render_model, plate
from pyro.distributions import Beta
from pyro import render_model
confounders_2_engagement = Confounders2Engagement().to(device)     #1
purchases_network = PurchasesNetwork().to(device)   #1
def data_model(data, device=device):
    pyro.module("confounder_2_engagement", confounders_2_engagement)     #2
    pyro.module("confounder_2_purchases", purchases_network)   #2
    two = tensor(2., device=device)
    five = tensor(5., device=device)
    params = {
        'ρ_member': sample('ρ_member', Beta(five, five)),     #3
        'ρ_won_engaged': sample('ρ_won_engaged', Beta(five, two)),    #4
        'ρ_won_not_engaged': sample('ρ_won_not_engaged', Beta(two, five)), #5
    }
    N = len(data["In-game Purchases"])
    with plate("N", N):    #6
        model(params)    #6
render_model(data_model, (data, ))
#1 Initialize the neural networks.
#2 pyro.module lets Pyro know about all the parameters inside the
networks.
#3 Sample from prior distribution for ρ_member
#4 Sample from prior distribution for ρ_won_engaged
#5 Sample from prior distribution for ρ_won_not_engaged
#6 The plate context manager declares N independent samples
(observations) from the causal variables.
render_model lets us visualize the resulting plate model,
producing figure 11.18. ρ_member, ρ_won_engaged,
ρ_won_not_engaged are the parameters we wish to estimate,
alongside the weights in the neural nets.

Figure 11.18 The plate model representation produced by Pyro
Now that we’ve specified the model, lets set up inference
with SVI.
11.6.5 Setting up posterior inference with SVI
We have a data model over an underlying causal model, so
we can now move on to inference. Using SVI, we need to
build a guide function that represents a distribution that
approximates the posterior—the guide function will have
hyperparameters directly optimized during training, which
will bring the approximating distribution as close as possible
to the posterior.

WHY DO INFERENCE WITH SVI AND NOT MCMC?
In chapter 10, we used an MCMC inference algorithm to
derive P(IE=0) and P(IE=0|E=1) from P(G, W, I, E). The θ
parameters were given. Now the θ parameters are
unknown, and we are using Bayesian estimation, meaning
we want to infer IE=e conditional on values of those θ
parameters sampled from a posterior distribution derived
from training data. We do this by considering variables { ,
, , , } where { , , 
, } is a set of variables in the
training data,  is a latent proxy for our latent confounders,
and each of these variables are vectors of length N, the
size of our training data.
The challenge is the computational complexity of MCMC
algorithms generally grows exponentially in the dimension
of the posterior. When  is a latent variable, it gets added
to the posterior as another unknown along with the θs, so
the shape of the posterior increases by ’s dimension,
which is at least the size of the training data N. This poses
a challenge when N is large. We want an inference method
that works well with large data so we can leverage all that
data to do cool things like use deep neural networks to
help us proxy our latent confounders in a causal
generative model. So here we use SVI instead of MCMC
because SVI shines in high-dimensional large data settings.
The main ingredient of the guide function is an encoder that
will map Side-Quest Engagement, Won Items, and In-Game
Purchases to Z ; i.e., it will impute the latent values of Z.

Listing 11.25 Create an encoder for Z
class Encoder(nn.Module):
    def __init__(self, input_dim=3,  #1
                 z_dim=1,     #2
                 hidden_dim=5):     #3
        super().__init__()
        self.f_hidden = nn.Linear(input_dim, hidden_dim)
        self.f_loc = nn.Linear(hidden_dim, z_dim)
        self.f_scale = nn.Linear(hidden_dim, z_dim)
        self.softplus = nn.Softplus()
    def forward(self, input):
        input = input.t()
        hidden = self.softplus(self.f_hidden(input))   #4
        z_loc = self.f_loc(hidden)   #5
        z_scale = 1e-6 + self.softplus(self.f_scale(hidden))     #6
        return z_loc.t().squeeze(0), z_scale.t().squeeze(0)
#1 Input dimension is 3 because it will combine Side-Quest
Engagement, In-Game Purchases, and Guild Membership.
#2 I use a simple univariate Z, but we could give it higher dimension
with sufficient data.
#3 The width of the hidden layer is 5.
#4 Go from input to hidden layer.
#5 Mapping from hidden layer to location parameter for Z
#6 Mapping from hidden layer scale parameter to Z
Now, using the encoder, we build the overall guide function.
In the following guide, we’ll sample the parameters ρ_member,
ρ_won_engaged, and ρ_won_not_engaged from beta distributions
parameterized by constants set using param. These
“hyperparameters” are optimized during training, alongside
the weights of the neural networks.

Listing 11.26 Build the guide function (approximating distribution)
from pyro import param
from torch.distributions.constraints import positive
encoder = Encoder().to(device)
def guide(data, device=device):
    pyro.module("encoder", encoder)
    α_member = param("α_member", tensor(1.0, device=device),     #1
                     constraint=positive)   #1
    β_member = param("β_member", tensor(1.0, device=device),    #1
                        constraint=positive)  #1
    sample('ρ_member', Beta(α_member, β_member))   #1
    α_won_engaged = param("α_won_engaged", tensor(5.0, device=device),     #2
                         constraint=positive)   #2
    β_won_engaged = param("β_won_engaged", tensor(2.0, device=device),   #2
                        constraint=positive)    #2
    sample('ρ_won_engaged', Beta(α_won_engaged, β_won_engaged))   #2
    α_won_not_engaged = param("α_won_not_engaged",   #2
                        tensor(2.0, device=device),    #2
                        constraint=positive)    #2
    β_won_not_engaged = param("β_won_not_engaged",   #2
                        tensor(5.0, device=device), #2
                        constraint=positive)   #2
    beta_dist = Beta(α_won_not_engaged, β_won_not_engaged)  #2
    sample('ρ_won_not_engaged', beta_dist)   #2
    N = len(data["In-game Purchases"])
    with pyro.plate("N", N):
        z_input = torch.stack(    #3
            (data["Guild Membership"],     #3
             data["Side-quest Engagement"],     #3
             data["In-game Purchases"])    #3
        ).to(device)     #3
        z_loc, z_scale = encoder(z_input)   #3
        pyro.sample("Z", Normal(z_loc, z_scale))    #3
#1 The guide samples ρ_member from a beta distribution where the
shape parameters are trainable.
#2 ρ_won_engaged and ρ_won_ not_engaged are also sampled from beta
distributions with trainable parameters.
#3 ρ_won_engaged and ρ_won_not_engaged are also sampled from beta
distributions with trainable parameters.
#4 Z is sampled from a normal with parameters returned by the
encoder.
Finally, we set up the inference algorithm and run the
training loop.

Listing 11.27 Run the training loop
from pyro.infer import SVI, Trace_ELBO
from pyro.optim import Adam
from pyro import condition
pyro.clear_param_store()    #1
adam_params = {"lr": 0.0001, "betas": (0.90, 0.999)}    #2
optimizer = Adam(adam_params)    #2
training_model = condition(data_model, data)     #3
svi = SVI(training_model, guide, optimizer, loss=Trace_ELBO())     #4
elbo_values = []    #5
N = len(data['In-game Purchases'])    #5
for step in range(500_000):    #5
    loss = svi.step(data) / N    #5
    elbo_values.append(loss)   #5
    if step % 500 == 0:     #5
        print(loss)     #5
#1 Reset parameter values in case we restart the training loop.
#2 Set up Adam optimizer. A learning rate (“lr”) of 0.001 may work
better if using CUDA.
#3 Condition the data_model on the observed data.
#4 Set up SVI.
#5 Run the training loop.
We’ll now plot the loss curve to see how training performed.
Listing 11.28 Plot the losses during training
import math
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
plt.plot([math.log(item) for item in elbo_values])     #1
plt.xlabel('Step')     #1
plt.ylabel('Log-Loss')     #1
plt.title('Log Training Loss')     #1
plt.show()     #1
#1 Plot the log of training loss, since loss is initially large.
The losses shown in figure 11.19 indicate training has
converged.


Figure 11.19 Log of ELBO loss during training
We can print the trained values of the hyperparameters
(α_member, β_member, α_won_engaged, β_won_engaged,
α_won_not_engaged, and β_won_not_engaged).
Listing 11.29 Print the values of the trained parameters in the guide
function
print((    
     pyro.param("α_member"),    
     pyro.param("β_member"),    
     pyro.param("α_won_engaged"),    
     pyro.param("β_won_engaged"),    
     pyro.param("α_won_not_engaged"),    
     pyro.param("β_won_not_engaged")    
))
This returned the following:
(tensor(1.3953, grad_fn=<AddBackward0>), tensor(1.3558, grad_fn=<AddBackward0>), tens
or(4.3976, grad_fn=<AddBackward0>), tensor(3.1667, grad_fn=<AddBackward0>), tensor(0.
8065, grad_fn=<AddBackward0>), tensor(10.8452, grad_fn=<AddBackward0>))
We’ll approximate our posterior by sampling ρ_member,
ρ_won_engaged, and ρ_won_not_engaged from beta distributions
with these values, sampling Z from a normal(0, 1), and then
sampling the remaining causal variables based on these
values.
11.6.6 Posterior predictive inference of the ATE
Given a sample of the parameters and a sample vector of Z
from the guide (our proxy for the posterior), we can simulate
a new data set. A common way of checking how well a
Bayesian model fits the data is to compare this simulated
data with the original data. This comparison is called a
posterior predictive check, and it helps us understand if the
trained model is a good fit for the data. In the following code,
we’ll do a posterior predictive check of In-Game Purchases;
we’ll use the guide to generate samples and use those
samples to repeatedly simulate In-Game Purchase datasets.

For each simulated dataset, we’ll create a density curve.
We’ll then plot these curves, along with the density curve of
the In-Game Purchases in the original data.
Listing 11.30 Posterior predictive check of In-Game Purchases
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import seaborn as sns
from pyro.infer import Predictive
predictive = Predictive(data_model, guide=guide, num_samples=1000)     #1
predictive_samples_all = predictive(data)    #1
predictive_samples = predictive_samples_all["In-game Purchases"]    #1
for i, sample_data in enumerate(predictive_samples):     #2
    if i == 0:    #2
        sns.kdeplot(sample_data,    #2
            color="lightgrey", label="Predictive density")    #2
    else:     #2
        sns.kdeplot(sample_data,     #2
            color="lightgrey", linewidth=0.2, alpha=0.5)     #2
sns.kdeplot(     #3
    data['In-game Purchases'],    #3
    color="black",   #3
    linewidth=1,    #3
    label="Empirical density"     #3
)   #3
plt.legend()
plt.title("Posterior Predictive Check of In-game Purchases")
plt.xlabel("Value")
plt.ylabel("Density")
plt.show()
#1 Simulate data from the (approximate) posterior predictive
distribution.
#2 For each batch of simulated data, create and plot a density curve of
In-Game Purchases.
#3 Overlay the empirical density distribution of In-Game Purchases so
we can compare it with the predictive plots.
This produces a plot as in figure 11.20. The degree to which
the simulated distribution matches the empirical distribution
depends on the model, the size of the data, and how well the
model is trained.


Figure 11.20 Posterior predictive check of In-Game Purchases. Grey
lines are density curves calculated on simulations from the posterior
predictive distribution. The black line is the empirical density (density
curves calculated on the data itself). More overlap indicates the model
fits the data well.
Our Bayesian estimator of the ATE will be our approach of
applying transformation and inference to the posterior
distribution represented by our model and guide. Since the
ATE is E(IE= 1 ) – E(IE= 0 ), we’ll do posterior predictive
sampling from P(IE= 1) and P(IE= 0).
First, we’ll use pyro.do to transform the model to represent
the intervention. Then we’ll do forward sampling from the
model using the Predictive class. This will sample 1,000
simulated datasets, each equal in length to the original data,
and each corresponding to a random sample of ρ_member,
ρ_won_engaged, ρ_won_unengaged, and a data vector of Z values.
Objects from the Predictive class do simple forward sampling.
If we needed to condition on anything (e.g., conditioning on
E  = 1 in P(IE= 0|E  = 1)), we’d need to use another inference
approach (e.g., importance sampling, MCMC, etc.).
Listing 11.31 Sampling from the posterior predictive distributions
P(IE=0) and P(IE=1)
from pyro.infer import Predictive
from pyro import do
data_model_low_engagement = do(    #1
    data_model, {"Side-quest Engagement": 0.})   #1
predictive_low_engagement = Predictive(     #2
    data_model_low_engagement, guide=guide, num_samples=1000)   #2
predictive_low_engagement_samples = predictive_low_engagement(data)   #2
data_model_high_engagement = do(    #3
    data_model, {"Side-quest Engagement": 1.})    #3
predictive_high_engagement = Predictive(    #4
    data_model_high_engagement, guide=guide, num_samples=1000)   #4
predictive_high_engagement_samples = predictive_high_engagement(data)
#1 Apply pyro.do transformation to implement intervention do(E=0).
#2 Sample 1,000 samples of datasets from P(I E = 0).
#3 Apply pyro.do transformation to implement intervention do(E=1).
#4 Sample 1,000 samples of datasets from P(I E = 1).

We can plot these two sets of posterior predictive samples as
follows:
Listing 11.32 Plot density curves of predictive datasets sampled from
P(IE=1) and P(IE=0)
low_samples = predictive_low_engagement_samples["In-game Purchases"]     #1
for i, sample_data in enumerate(low_samples):   #1
    if i == 0:  #1
        sns.kdeplot(sample_data,   #1
            clip=(0, 35000), color="darkgrey", label="$P(I_{E=0})$")    #1
    else:   #1
        sns.kdeplot(sample_data,  #1
            clip=(0, 35000), color="darkgrey",    #1
            linewidth=0.2, alpha=0.5)   #1
            #1
high_samples = predictive_high_engagement_samples["In-game Purchases"]    #1
for i, sample_data in enumerate(high_samples):   #1
    if i == 0:    #1
        sns.kdeplot(sample_data,   #1
            clip=(0, 35000), color="lightgrey", label="$P(I_{E=1})$")    #1
    else:   #1
        sns.kdeplot(sample_data,    #1
            clip=(0, 35000), color="lightgrey",   #1
            linewidth=0.2, alpha=0.5)    #1
title = ("Posterior predictive sample density "     #2
         "curves of $P(I_{E=1})$ & $P(I_{E=0})$")     #2
plt.title(title)     #2
plt.legend()     #2
plt.xlabel("Value")   #2
plt.ylabel("Density")     #2
plt.ylim((0, .0010))    #2
plt.xlim((0, 4000))     #2
plt.show()     #2
#1 For each sample, use kdeplot to draw a curve. Plot P( I E = 0) as dark
grey and P( I E = 1) as light gray.
#2 Plot the density curves.
Whereas figure 11.20 plotted a predictive distribution on
P(I  ), figure 11.21 plots predictive density plots of P (IE=  0 )
and P (IE= 1). We can see that the distributions differ.

Figure 11.21 Posterior predictive visualization of density curves
calculated from simulated data from P(IE=1) (light gray) and P(IE=0)

(dark gray)
Finally, to estimate E(IE= 1) and E(IE= 0), we just need take the
means of each posterior predictive sample dataset simulated
from P(IE= 1) and P(IE= 1), respectively. This will yield 1,000
samples of posterior predictive values of the ATE. Variation
between the samples reflects posterior uncertainty about the
ATE.
Listing 11.33 Estimate the ATE
samp_high = predictive_high_engagement_samples['In-game Purchases']    #1
exp_high = samp_high.mean(1)   #1
samp_low = predictive_low_engagement_samples['In-game Purchases']    #2
exp_low = samp_low.mean(1)    #2
ate_distribution = exp_high - exp_low    #3
sns.kdeplot(ate_distribution)     #4
plt.title("Posterior distribution of the ATE")    #4
plt.xlabel("Value")     #4
plt.ylabel("Density")    #4
plt.show()    #4
#1 Estimate E( I E = 1).
#2 Estimate E( I E = 0).
#3 Estimate the ATE = E( I E = 1) – E( I E = 0).
#4 Use a density curve to visualize posterior variation in the ATE values.
This prints figure 11.22, a visualization of the posterior
predictive distribution of the ATE.

Figure 11.22 Posterior predictive distribution of the ATE

With a Bayesian approach, we get a posterior predictive
distribution of the ATE. If we want a CATE, we can simply
modify the posterior predictive inference to condition on
other variables. If we want a point estimate of the ATE, we
can take the mean of these predictive samples. More data
reduces variance in the ATE distribution (assuming the ATE is
identified) as in figure 11.23.

Figure 11.23 Posterior uncertainty declines with more data.

We can construct credible intervals (the Bayesian analog to
confidence intervals) by taking percentiles from this
distribution.
11.6.7 On the identifiability of the Bayesian
causal generative inference
We got these results with a causal latent variable model,
where Z was the latent variable. We are no strangers to
latent variable models in probabilistic machine learning, but
are they safe for causal inference? For example, if we could
do causal inference with this latent variable model, what is
to stop us from using the model in figure 11.24?
We could train this model, apply the transformations, get
samples from the posterior predictive distribution of the ATE,
and get an answer. But we lack graphical identification in this
case. Our answer would have confounder bias that we
couldn’t fix with more data, at least not without some strong,
non-graphical assumptions (e.g., in the priors or in the
functional relationships between variables).
Our model has graphical identification. In our case, we
observed a mediator in Won Items, so we know we have a
front-door estimand. Our causal generative model estimation
procedure is just another estimator of that estimand.

Figure 11.24 The causal latent variable model with no mediator W, and
thus no identification. If we had fit this model and used it to infer the
ATE, we’d get a result. But without identification, we wouldn’t be able
to eliminate confounder bias, even with more data.
11.6.8 Closing thoughts on causal latent
variable models
This approach of combining causal generative models with
latent variables and deep learning is not limited to ATEs—it is
general to all causal queries. We only need to select the right
transformation for the query. This approach “commodifies
inference” by relying on auto-differentiation tools to do the
statistical and computational heavy lifting, instead of having
to understand and implement different estimators like in

DoWhy. It also scales to multidimensional causes, outcomes,
and other variables in a way DoWhy does not. An additional
advantage is that tools like Pyro and PyMC allow you to put
Bayesian priors on the causal models themselves. Since the
lack of causal identification boils down to model uncertainty,
putting priors on models gives us an additional way of
encoding domain assumptions that yield additional
identification.
Summary
DoWhy provides a useful workflow for identifying and
estimating causal effects.
In step 1 of the causal inference workflow, we specify our
target query. In this chapter, we focused on causal
effects (ATEs and CATEs).
In step 2 we specify our causal model. We specified a
DAG in Graphviz DOT format and loaded it into a
CausalModel in DoWhy.
In step 3 we run identification. DoWhy identified
backdoor, 
front-door, 
and 
instrumental 
variable
estimands.
Each estimand relies on a different set of causal
assumptions. If you are more confident in the causal
assumptions of one estimand than others, you should
target that estimand.
We 
targeted 
the 
backdoor 
estimand 
with 
linear
regression, propensity score methods, and machine
learning (ML) methods.
The backdoor adjustment set is the set of backdoor
variables we adjust for in the backdoor adjustment
estimand. A valid adjustment set d-separates all
backdoor paths. There could be more than one valid set.

In step 4 we estimate our selected estimand. DoWhy
makes it easy to try different estimators.
Linear regression is a popular estimand because it is
simple, familiar, and gives a point estimate of the ATE
even for continuous causes.
A propensity score is traditionally the probability a
subject in the data is exposed to the treatment value of
the binary cause (treatment) variable, conditional on the
confounders in the adjustment set. It is often modeled
using logistic regression.
However, a propensity score can be any variable you
construct 
that 
renders 
the 
treatment 
variable
conditionally independent of the adjustment set.
Propensity 
score 
methods 
include 
matching,
stratification, and inverse probability weighting.
ML methods targeting the backdoor estimand include
double ML and meta learners. DoWhy provides a wrapper
to EconML that implements several ML methods.
Generally, ML methods are a good choice when you have
larger datasets. They allow you to rely on fewer
statistical assumptions. However, calculating confidence
intervals on the estimates is computationally expensive.
Instrumental 
variable 
estimation 
and 
front-door
estimation don’t rely on having a valid backdoor
adjustment set, but they rely on different causal
assumptions.
In step 5, we run refutation analysis. Refutation is a
sensitivity analysis that attempts to refute the causal
and statistical assumptions we rely on in estimating our
target query.
Causal 
generative 
models 
combine 
model
transformations, such as graph mutilation, node-splitting,
and multi-world transforms, with probabilistic inference
to do causal inference.

This approach becomes an estimator of an identified
estimand when the model parameters are learned from
data.
When there are latent variables, such as latent
confounders, you can train the causal generative model
as a latent variable model.
The causal inference with the latent variable model will
work if you have graphical identification. If not, you’ll
need to rely on other identifying assumptions.

12 Causal decisions and
reinforcement learning
This chapter covers
Using causal models to automate decisions
Setting up causal bandit algorithms
How to incorporate causality into reinforcement learning
When we apply methods from statistics and machine
learning, it is typically in service of making a decision or
automating decision-making. Algorithms for automated
decision-making, such as bandit and reinforcement learning
(RL) algorithms, involve agents that learn how to make good
decisions. In both cases, decision-making is fundamentally a
causal problem: a decision to take some course of action
leads to consequences, and the objective is to choose the
action that leads to consequences favorable to the decision-
maker. That motivates a causal framing.
Often, the path from action to consequences has a degree of
randomness. For example, your choice of how to play a hand
of poker may be optimal, but you still might lose due to
chance. That motivates a probabilistic modeling approach.
The causal probabilistic modeling approach we’ve used so
far in this book is a stone that hits both these birds. This
chapter will provide a causality-first introduction to basic
ideas in statistical decision theory, sequential decision-
making, bandits, and RL. By “causality-first,” I mean I’ll use
the foundation we’ve built in previous chapters to introduce
these ideas in a causal light. I’ll also present the ideas in a
way that is compatible with our probabilistic ML framing.

Even if you are already familiar with these decision-making
and RL concepts, I encourage you to read on and see them
again through a causal lens. Once we do that, we’ll see cases
where the causal approach to RL gets a better result than
the noncausal approach.
12.1 A causal primer on decision
theory
Decision theory is concerned with the reasoning underlying
an agent’s choice of some course of action. An “agent” here
is an entity that chooses an action.
For example, suppose you were deciding whether to invest in
a company by purchasing equity or purchasing debt (i.e.,
loaning money to the company and receiving interest
payments). We’ll call this variable X. Whether the company is
successful (Y  ) depends on the type of investment it
receives.
Figure 12.1 A simple causal DAG where action X causes some outcome
Y. Decision theory is a causal problem because if deciding on an action
didn’t have causal consequences, what would be the point of making
decisions?
Since X causally drives Y, we can immediately introduce a
causal DAG, as in figure 12.1.
We’ll use this example to illustrate basic concepts in decision
theory from a causal point of view.

12.1.1 Utility, reward, loss, and cost
The agent generally chooses actions that will cause them to
gain some utility (or minimize some loss). In decision
modeling, you can define a utility function (aka a reward
function) that quantifies the desirability of various outcomes
of a decision. Suppose you invest at $1,000:
If the company becomes successful, you get $100,000.
Your utility is 100,000 – 1,000 = $99,000.
If the company fails, you get $0 and lose your
investment. Your utility is –1,000.
We can add this utility as a node on the graph, as in figure
12.2.
Figure 12.2 A utility node can represent utility/reward, loss/cost.
Note that utility is a deterministic function of Y in this model,
which we’ll denote U(Y).
Instead of a utility/reward function, we could define a loss
function (aka, a cost function), which is simply –1 times the
utility/reward function. For example, in the second scenario,
where you purchase stock and the company fails, your utility
is –$1,000 and your loss is $1,000.

While the agent’s goal is to decide on a course of action that
will maximize utility, doing so is challenging because there is
typically some uncertainty in whether an action will lead to
the desired result. In our example, it may seem obvious to
invest in equity because equity will lead to business success,
and business success will definitely lead to more utility. But
there is some uncertainty in whether an equity investment
will lead to business success. In other words we don’t
assume P (Y = success|X = equity) = 1. Both success and
failure have nonzero probability in P (Y |X = equity).
12.1.2 Uncertainty comes from other causes
In causal terms, given action X, there is still some
uncertainty in the outcome Y because there are other causal
factors driving that outcome. For example, suppose the
success of the business depends on economic conditions, as
in figure 12.3.
Figure 12.3 We typically have uncertainty in our decision-making. From
a causal perspective, uncertainty is because of other causal factors out
of our control that affect variables downstream of our actions.
Alternatively, those other causal factors could affect utility
directly. For example, rather than the two discrete scenarios
of profit or loss I outlined for our business investment, the
amount of utility (or loss) could depend on how well or how
poorly the economy fares, as in figure 12.4. We can leverage

statistical and probability modeling to address this
uncertainty.
Figure 12.4 Causal factors outside of our control can impact utility (or
loss) directly.
Suppose you are thinking about whether to invest in this
business. You want your decision to be data-driven, so you
research what other investors in this market have done
before. You consider the causal DAG in figure 12.5.
Figure 12.5 In this DAG, economic conditions drive how investors
choose to invest.
Based on your research, you conclude that past investors’
equity vs. debt choice also depends on the economic
conditions. P (X  |C) represents an action distribution—the
distribution of actions that the population of investors you
are studying take.

However, the goal of your analysis centers on yourself, not
other investors. You want to answer questions like “what if I
bought equity?” That question puts us in causal territory. We
are not reasoning about observational investment trends; we
are reasoning about conditional hypotheticals. That is an
indicator that we need to introduce intervention-based
reasoning and counterfactual notation.
12.2 Causal decision theory
In this section, we’ll highlight decision-making as a causal
query and examine what that means for modeling decision-
making.
12.2.1 Decisions as a level 2 query
A major source of confusion for causal decision modeling is
the difference between actions and interventions. In many
decision contexts, especially in RL, the action is a thing that
the agent does that changes their environment. Yet, the
action is also a variable driven by the environment. We see
this when we look at the investment example, shown again
in figure 12.6.
Figure 12.6 In this version of the investment DAG, the choice of action is
caused by external factors.

The action of selecting equity or debt is a variable causally
driven by the economy. What does that mean? Is an action a
variable with causes, or is it an intervention?
The answer is both, depending on context. When it is which
depends on the question we are asking and where that
question sits in the causal hierarchy (discussed in chapter
10). When we are talking about what actions usually happen,
such as when we are observing the actions of other agents
(or even when reflecting on our own past actions) and what
results those actions led to, we are reflecting on trends in
population, and we are on level 1 of the causal hierarchy. In
the case of our investment example, we’re reasoning about
P (C, X, Y, U ). But if we’re asking questions like “what would
happen if I made an equity investment?” then we’re asking a
level 2 question, and we need the proposed action as an
intervention.
Next, we’ll characterize common decision rules using our
causal notation.
12.2.2 Causal characterization of decision rules
and policies
A decision rule is a rule for choosing an action based on the
utility distribution P (U (YX=x)). The agent chooses an optimal
action according to a decision rule. For example, a common
decision rule is choosing the action that minimizes loss or
cost or maximizes utility or reward.
In automated decision-making, the decision rule is often
called a “policy.” In public health settings, decision rules are
sometimes called “treatment regimes.”

MAXIMIZING EXPECTED UTILITY
The most intuitive and commonly seen decision rule is to
choose the action that maximizes expected utility. First, we
can look at the expectation of the utility distribution. Since
utility is a deterministic function of YX=x, this is just the
expectation of U (YX=x) over the intervention distribution of Y.
We then choose the action (value of x) that maximizes
expected utility:
In our investment example, this means choosing the
investment approach that is expected to make you the most
money.
MINIMAX DECISION RULES
To understand the minimax decision rule, recall that the
terms “utility” and “loss” are two sides of the same coin;
utility == negative loss. Let L(y ) = – U(y ). Then a minimax
decision rule is
In plain English, this means “choose the action that
minimizes the maximum amount of possible loss.” In our

investment example, this means choosing the investment
approach that will minimize the amount of money you’d lose
in the worst case scenario. There are many variants of
minimax rules, but they have the same flavor—minimizing
loss or maximizing utility during bad times.
SOFTMAX RULES
A softmax decision rule randomly selects an action with a
probability proportional to the resulting utility.
Let’s define C (x ) as the probability of choosing the action x.
Then C (x ) is defined as a probability value proportional to
The noise parameter α modulates between the two
extremes. When α=0, we have a uniform distribution on all
the choices. As α gets larger, we approach maximizing
expected utility.
Sometimes our goal is to model the decision-making of other
agents, such as in inverse RL. The softmax decision rule is
useful when agents don’t always make the utility-optimizing
choice. The softmax decision rule provides a simple,
analytically tractable, and empirically validated model of
suboptimal choice.
Another reason we might want to use the softmax rule is
when there is a trade-off between exploring and exploiting,
such as with bandit problems. Suppose the agent is
uncertain about the shape of the distibution P (YX=x). The
optimal action according to an incorrect model of P (YX=x)
might be different from the optimal choice according to the
correct model of P (YX=x). The softmax decision rule allows us
to choose various actions, get some data on the results, and

use that data to update our model of P (YX=x). When this is
done in sequence, it’s often called Thompson sampling.
In our investment analogy, suppose we were to invest in
several businesses. Perhaps, according to our current model,
equity investment maximizes expected utility, but we’re not
fully confident in our current model, so we opt to select debt
investment even though the current model says its less
optimal. The goal is to add diversity to our dataset, so that
we can learn a better model.
OTHER TYPES OF DECISION RULES
There are other types of decision rules, and they can become
complicated, especially when they involve statistical
estimation. For example, using p-values in statistical
hypothesis testing involves a nuanced utility function that
balances the chances of a false positive (incorrectly choosing
the alternative hypothesis) and a false negative (incorrectly
choosing the null hypothesis).
Fortunately, when we work with probabilistic causal models,
the math tends to be easier, and we get a nice guarantee
called admissibility.
12.2.3 Causal probabilistic decision-modeling
and admissibility
In this section, I’ll provide a short justification for choosing a
causal probabilistic modeling approach to decision-making.
When you implement an automated decision-making
algorithm in a production setting, you might have to explain
why your implementation is better than another. In that
setting, it is useful if you know if your algorithm is
admissible.

A decision rule is admissible if there are no other rules that
dominate it. A decision rule dominates another rule if the
performance of the former is sometimes better, and never
worse, than that of the other rule with respect to the utility
function. For example, the softmax decision rule is
dominated by maximizing expected utility (assuming you
know the true shape of P (YX = x )) because sometimes it will
select suboptimal actions, and it is thus inadmissible.
Determining admissibility is a key task in decision theory.
The challenge for us occurs when we use data and statistics
to deal with unknowns, such as parameters or latent
variables. If we want to use data to estimate a parameter or
work with latent variables, there are usually a variety of
statistical approaches to choose from. If our decision-making
algorithm depends on a statistical procedure, the choice of
procedure can influence which action is considered optimal.
How do we know if our statistical decision-making procedure
is admissible?
Probabilistic modeling libraries like Pyro leverage Bayesian
inference to estimate parameters or impute latent variables.
Bayesian decision theory tells us that Bayes rules, (not to be
confused with Bayes’s rule) decision rules that optimize
posterior expected utility, have an admissibility guarantee
under mild regularity conditions. This means that if we use
Bayesian inference in Pyro or similar libraries to calculate
and optimize posterior expected loss, we have an
admissibility guarantee (if those mild conditions hold, and
they usually do). That means you needn’t worry that
someone else’s decision-making model (that makes the
same modeling assumptions, has the same utility function,
and uses the same data) will beat yours.

12.2.4 The deceptive alignment of argmax
values of causal and non-causal expectations
Most conventional approaches to decision-making, including
in RL, focus on maximizing E (U(Y  )|X  = x) rather than E (U 
(YX= x)). Let’s implement the model in figure 12.6 with
pgmpy and compare the two approaches.
First, we’ll build the DAG in the model.
SETTING UP YOUR ENVIRONMENT
This code was written with pgmpy version 0.1.24. See the
chapter notes at https://www.altdeep.ai/p/causalaibook for
a link to the notebook that runs this code.
Listing 12.1 DAG for investment decision model
from pgmpy.models import BayesianNetwork
from pgmpy.factors.discrete import TabularCPD
from pgmpy.inference import VariableElimination
import numpy as np
model = BayesianNetwork([     #1
    ('C', 'X'),    #1
    ('C', 'Y'),     #1
    ('X', 'Y'),     #1
    ('Y', 'U')    #1
])    #1
#1 Set up the DAG
Next we’ll build the causal Markov kernels for Economy (C  ),
Debt vs. Equity (X  ), and Business Success (Y). The causal
Markov kernel for Economy (C  ) will take two values: “bear”
for bad economic conditions and “bull” for good. The causal
Markov kernel for Debt vs. Equity (X  ) will depend on C,
reflecting the fact that investors tend to prefer equity in a
bull economy and debt in a bear economy. Success (Y  )

depends on the economy and the choice of debt or equity
investment.
Listing 12.2 Create causal Markov kernels for C, X, and Y
cpd_c = TabularCPD(    #1
    variable='C',   #1
    variable_card=2,   #1
    values=[[0.5], [0.5]],   #1
    state_names={'C': ['bear', 'bull']}   #1
)    #1
cpd_x = TabularCPD(    #2
    variable='X',     #2
    variable_card=2,   #2
    values=[[0.8, 0.2], [0.2, 0.8]],     #2
    evidence=['C'],     #2
    evidence_card=[2],     #2
    state_names={'X': ['debt', 'equity'], 'C': ['bear', 'bull']}     #2
)    #2
cpd_y = TabularCPD(     #3
    variable='Y',     #3
    variable_card=2,    #3
    values= [[0.3, 0.9, 0.7, 0.6], [0.7, 0.1, 0.3, 0.4]],    #3
    evidence=['X', 'C'],    #3
    evidence_card=[2, 2],     #3
    state_names={     #3
        'Y': ['failure', 'success'],   #3
        'X': ['debt', 'equity'],     #3
        'C': ['bear', 'bull']     #3
    }    #3
)     #3
#1 Set up causal Markov kernel for C (economy). It takes two values:
“bull” and “bear”.
#2 Set up causal Markov kernel for action X, either making a debt
investment or equity investment depending on the economy.
#3 Set up causal Markov kernel for business outcome Y, either success
or failure, depending on the type of investment provided (X) and the
economy (C).
Finally, we’ll add the Utility node (U  ). We use probabilities of
1 and 0 to represent a deterministic function of Y. We end by
adding all the kernels to the model.

Listing 12.3 Implement the utility node and initialize the model
cpd_u = TabularCPD(     #1
    variable='U',    #1
    variable_card=2,    #1
    values=[[1., 0.], [0., 1.]],  #1
    evidence=['Y'],   #1
    evidence_card=[2],    #1
    state_names={'U': [-1000, 99000], 'Y': ['failure', 'success']}  #1 
)    #1
print(cpd_u)    #1
model.add_cpds(cpd_c, cpd_x, cpd_y, cpd_u)   #1
#1 Set up the utility node.
#2 Set up the utility node.
This code prints out the following conditional probability
tables for our causal Markov kernels. This one is for the
Utility variable:
+----------+------------+------------+
| Y        | Y(failure) | Y(success) |
+----------+------------+------------+
| U(-1000) | 1.0        | 0.0        |
+----------+------------+------------+
| U(99000) | 0.0        | 1.0        |
+----------+------------+------------+
This reflects the investor trends of favoring equity
investments in a bull market and debt investments in a bear
market.
The following probability table is for the Business Success
variable Y :
+------------+---------+---------+-----------+-----------+
| X          | X(debt) | X(debt) | X(equity) | X(equity) |
+------------+---------+---------+-----------+-----------+
| C          | C(bear) | C(bull) | C(bear)   | C(bull)   |
+------------+---------+---------+-----------+-----------+
| Y(failure) | 0.3     | 0.9     | 0.7       | 0.6       |
+------------+---------+---------+-----------+-----------+
| Y(success) | 0.7     | 0.1     | 0.3       | 0.4       |
+------------+---------+---------+-----------+-----------+
This reflects debt being a less preferred source of financing
in a bear market when interest rate payments are higher,
and equity being preferred in a bull market because equity is
cheaper.

Finally, the Utility node is a simple deterministic function that
maps Y to utility values:
+----------+------------+------------+
| Y        | Y(failure) | Y(success) |
+----------+------------+------------+
| U(-1000) | 1.0        | 0.0        |
+----------+------------+------------+
| U(99000) | 0.0        | 1.0        |
+----------+------------+------------+
Next, we’ll calculate E (U (YX=x)) and E (U(Y  )|X = x ). Before
proceeding, download and load a helper function that
implements an ideal intervention. To allay any security
concerns of directly executing downloaded code, the code
prints the downloaded script and prompts you to confirm
before executing the script.
Listing 12.4 Download helper function for implementing an ideal
intervention
import requests
url = "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/altdeep/causalML/master/book/pgmpy_do.py"    
#1
response = requests.get(url)    #1
content = response.text    #1
print("Downloaded script content:\n")     #2
print(content)    #2
confirm = input("\nDo you want to execute this script? (yes/no): ")    #2
if confirm.lower() == 'yes':    #2
    exec(content)   #2
else:    #2
    print("Script execution cancelled.")    #2
#1 Load an implementation of an ideal intervention.
#2 To allay security concerns, you can inspect the downloaded script
and confirm it before running.
By now, in this book, you should not be surprised that E (U 
(YX=x )) is different from E (U(Y  )|X = x ). Let’s look at these
values.

Listing 12.5 Calculate E(U(Y)|X=x) and E(U(YX=x))
def get_expectation(marginal):     #1
    u_values = marginal.state_names["U"]    #1
    probs = marginal.values    #1
    expectation = sum([x * p for x, p in zip(u_values, probs)])   #1
    return expectation    #1
infer = VariableElimination(model)     #2
marginal_u_given_debt = infer.query( #2
    variables=['U'], evidence={'X': 'debt'})     #2
marginal_u_given_equity = infer.query( #2
    variables=['U'], evidence={'X': 'equity'})    #2
e_u_given_x_debt = get_expectation(marginal_u_given_debt)    #2
e_u_given_x_equity = get_expectation(marginal_u_given_equity)    #2
print("E(U(Y)|X=debt)=", e_u_given_x_debt)    #2
print("E(U(Y)|X=equity)=", e_u_given_x_equity)     #2
int_model_x_debt = do(model, {"X": "debt"})     #3
infer_debt = VariableElimination(int_model_x_debt)    #3
marginal_u_given_debt = infer_debt.query(variables=['U'])    #3
expectation_u_given_debt = get_expectation(marginal_u_given_debt)    #3
print("E(U(Y_{X=debt}))=", expectation_u_given_debt)     #3
int_model_x_equity = do(model, {"X": "equity"})     #3
infer_equity = VariableElimination(int_model_x_equity)     #3
marginal_u_given_equity = infer_equity.query(variables=['U'])    #3
expectation_u_given_equity = get_expectation(marginal_u_given_equity)     #3
print("E(U(Y_{X=equity}))=", expectation_u_given_equity)     #3
#1 A helper function for calculating the expected utility
#2 Set X by intervention to debt and equity and calculate the
expectation of U under each intervention.
#3 Condition on X = debt and X = equity, and calculate the expectation
of U.
This gives us the following conditional expected utilities (I’ve
marked the highest with *):
E (U (Y  )|X = debt) = 57000 *
E (U (Y  )|X = equity) = 37000
It also gives us the following interventional expected utilities:
E (U (YX=debt)) = 39000 *
E (U (YX=equity)) = 34000
So E (U (Y  )|X = debt) is different from E(U(YX=debt)), and E (U 
(Y  )|X = equity) is different from E (U (YX= equity)). However,

our goal is to optimize expected utility, and in this case, debt
maximizes both E (U (Y  )|X = x) and E (U (YX=x)).
If “debt” maximizes both queries, what is the point of causal
decision theory? What does it matter if E (U (Y  )|X = x) and E 
(U (YX=x)) are different if the optimal action for both is the
same?
In decision problems, it is quite common that a causal
formulation of the problem provides the same answer as
more traditional noncausal formulations. This is especially
true in higher dimensional problems common in RL. You
might observe this and wonder why the causal formulation is
needed at all.
To answer, watch what happens when we make a slight
change to the parameters of Y in the model. Specifically,
we’ll change the parameter for P (Y = success|X = equity, C = 
bull) from .4 to .6. First, we’ll rebuild the model with the
parameter change.

Listing 12.6 Change a parameter in the causal Markov kernel for Y
model2 = BayesianNetwork([   #1
    ('C', 'X'),    #1
    ('C', 'Y'),    #1
    ('X', 'Y'),    #1
    ('Y', 'U')     #1
])
cpd_y2 = TabularCPD(    #2
    variable='Y',
    variable_card=2,
    values=[[0.3, 0.9, 0.7, 0.4],  [0.7, 0.1, 0.3, 0.6]],   #3
    evidence=['X', 'C'],
    evidence_card=[2, 2],
    state_names={
        'Y': ['failure', 'success'],
        'X': ['debt', 'equity'],
        'C': ['bear', 'bull']
    }
)
model2.add_cpds(cpd_c, cpd_x, cpd_y2, cpd_u)   #4
#1 Initialize a new model.
#2 Create a new conditional probability distribution for Y.
#3 Change the parameter P(Y=success|X=equity, C=bull) = 0.4 (the last
parameter in the first list) to 0.6.
#4 Add the causal Markov kernels to the model.
Next, we rerun inference.

Listing 12.7 Compare outcomes with changed parameters
infer = VariableElimination(model2)    #1
marginal_u_given_debt = infer.query(variables=['U'],    #1
↪evidence={'X': 'debt'})    #1
marginal_u_given_equity = infer.query(variables=['U'],   #1
↪evidence={'X': 'equity'})    #1
e_u_given_x_debt = get_expectation(marginal_u_given_debt)   #1
e_u_given_x_equity = get_expectation(marginal_u_given_equity)     #1
print("E(U(Y)|X=debt)=", e_u_given_x_debt)   #1
print("E(U(Y)|X=equity)=", e_u_given_x_equity)   #1
int_model_x_debt = do(model2, {"X": "debt"})    #2
infer_debt = VariableElimination(int_model_x_debt)    #2
marginal_u_given_debt = infer_debt.query(variables=['U'])   #2
expectation_u_given_debt = get_expectation(marginal_u_given_debt)    #2
print("E(U(Y_{X=debt}))=", expectation_u_given_debt)     #2
int_model_x_equity = do(model2, {"X": "equity"})     #2
infer_equity = VariableElimination(int_model_x_equity)    #2
marginal_u_given_equity = infer_equity.query(variables=['U'])    #2
expectation_u_given_equity = get_expectation(marginal_u_given_equity)     #2
print("E(U(Y_{X=equity}))=", expectation_u_given_equity)    #2
#1 Set X by intervention to debt and equity, and calculate the
expectation of U under each intervention.
#2 Condition on X = debt and X = equity, and calculate the expectation
of U.
This gives us the following conditional expectations (*
indicates the optimal choice):
E (U (Y  )|X = debt) = 57000 *
E (U (Y  )|X = equity) = 53000
It also gives us the following interventional expectations:
E (U(YX=debt )) = 39000
E (U (YX=equity)) = 44000 *
With that slight change in a single parameter, “debt” is still
the optimal value of x in E (U (Y  )|X=x ), but now “equity” is
the optimal value of x in E (U (YX=x)). This is a case where the
causal answer and the answer from conditioning on evidence
are different. Since we are trying to answer a level 2 query,
the causal approach is the right approach.

This means that while simply optimizing a conditional
expectation often gets you the right answer, you are
vulnerable to getting the wrong answer in certain
circumstances. Compare this to our discussion of semi-
supervised learning in chapter 4—often the unlabeled data
can help with learning, but, in specific circumstances, the
unlabeled data adds no value. Causal analysis helped us
characterize those circumstances in precise terms. Similarly,
in this case, there are specific scenarios where the causal
formulation of the problem will lead to a different and more
correct result relative to the traditional noncausal
formulation. Even the most popular decision-optimization
algorithms, including the deep learning-based approaches
used in deep RL, can improve performance by leveraging the
causal structure of a decision problem.
Next, we’ll see another example with Newcomb’s paradox.
12.2.5 Newcomb’s paradox
A famous thought experiment called Newcomb’s paradox
contrasts the causal approach to decision theory, maximizing
utility under intervention, with the conventional approach of
maximizing utility conditional on some action. We’ll look at
an AI-inspired version of this thought experiment in this
section, and the next section will show how to approach it
with a formal causal model.
There are two boxes designated A and B as shown in figure
12.7. Box A always contains $1,000. Box B contains either
$1,000,000 or $0. The decision-making agent must choose
between taking only box B or both boxes. The agent does not
know what is in box B until they decide. Given this
information, it is obvious the agent should take both boxes—
choosing both yields either $1,000 or $1,001,000, while
choosing only B yields either $0 or $1,000,000.

Figure 12.7 An illustration of the boxes in Newcomb's paradox
Now, suppose there is an AI that can predict with high
accuracy what choice the agent intends to make. If the AI
predicts that the agent intends to take both boxes, it will put
no money in box B. If the AI is correct and the agent takes
both boxes, the agent only gets $1,000. However, if the AI
predicts that the agent intends to take only box B, it will put
$1,000,000 in box B. If the AI predicts correctly, the agent
gets the $1,000,000 in box B but not the $1,000 in box A.
The agent does not know for sure what the AI predicted or
what box B contains until they make their choice.
The traditional paradox arises as follows. A causality-minded
agent reasons that the actions of the AI are out of their
control. They only focus on what they can control—the
causal consequences of their choice. They can’t cause the
content of box B, so they pick both boxes on the off-chance
box B has the million, just as one would if the AI didn’t exist.
But if the agent knows how the AI works, doesn’t it make
more sense to choose only box B and get the million with
certainty?
Let’s dig in further by enumerating the possible outcomes
and their probabilities. Let’s assume the AI’s predictions are
95% accurate. If the agent chooses both boxes, there is a
95% chance the AI will have guessed the agent’s choice and
put no money in B, in which case the agent only gets the
$1,000. There is a 5% chance the algorithm will guess
wrong, in which case it puts 1,000,000 in box B, and the

agent wins $1,001,000. If the agent chooses only box B,
there is a 95% chance the AI will have predicted the choice
and placed $1,000,000 in box B, giving the agent $1,000,000
in winnings. There is a 5% chance it will not, and the agent
will take home nothing. We see these outcomes in table
12.1. The expected utility calculations are shown in table
12.2.
Table 12.1 Newcomb’s problem outcomes and their probabilities
Strategy
AI action
Winnings
Probability
Choose both
Put $0 in box B
$1,000
.95
Choose both
Put $1,000,000 in box B
$1,001,000
.05
Choose only box B
Put $1,000,000 in box B
$1,000,000
.95
Choose only box B
Put $0 in box B
$0
.05
Table 12.2 Expected utility of each choice in Newcomb’s problem
Strategy ( x)
E( U| X= x)
Choose both
1,000 × .95 + 1,001,000 × .05 = $51,000
Choose only box B
1,000,000 × .05 + 0 × .05 = $950,000
The conventional approach suggests choosing box only box
B.
When the paradox was created, taking a causal approach to
the problem meant only attending to the causal
consequences of one’s actions. Remember that the AI makes
the prediction before the agent acts. Since effects cannot
precede causes in time, the AI’s behavior is not a
consequence of the agent’s actions, so the agent with the
causal view ignores the AI and goes with the original
strategy of choosing both boxes.
It would seem that the agent with the causal view is making
an error in failing to account for the actions of the AI. But we

can resolve this error by having the agent use a formal
causal model.
12.2.6 Newcomb’s paradox with a causal model
In the traditional formulation of Newcomb’s paradox, the
assumption is that the agent using causal decision theory
only attends to the consequences of their actions—they are
reasoning on the causal DAG in figure 12.8. But the true data
generating process (DGP) is better captured by figure 12.9.
Figure 12.8 Newcomb’s paradox assumes a version of causal decision
theory where a naive agent uses this incorrect causal DAG.
Figure 12.9 A better causal DAG representing the framing of Newcomb’s
paradox
The choice of the agent can’t cause the AI’s prediction,
because the prediction happens first. Thus, we assume the
AI agent is inferring the agent’s intent, and thus the intent of
the agent is the cause of the AI’s prediction.
The causal decision-making agent would prefer the graph in
figure 12.9 because it is a better representation of the DGP.

The clever agent wouldn’t focus on maximizing E (Uchoice=x).
The clever agent is aware of its own intention, and knowing
that this intention is a cause of the content of box B, it
focuses on optimizing E (Uchoice=x|intent  =i ), where i is their
original intention of which box to pick.
We’ll assume the agent’s initial intention is an impulse it
cannot control. But while they can’t control their initial
intent, they can do some introspection and become aware of
this intent. Further, we’ll assume that upon doing so, they
have the ability to change their choice to something different
from what it initially intended, after the AI has made their
prediction and set the contents of box B. Let’s model this
system in pgmpy and evaluate maximizing E 
(Uchoice=x|intent  =i ).
First, let’s build the DAG.
Listing 12.8 Create the DAG
model = BayesianNetwork(    
    [    
        ('intent', 'AI prediction'),    
        ('intent', 'choice'),    
        ('AI prediction', 'box B'),    
        ('choice', 'U'),    
        ('box B', 'U'),    
    ]    
)
Next, we’ll create causal Markov kernels for intent and
choice.

Listing 12.9 Create causal Markov kernels for intent and choice
cpd_intent = TabularCPD(     #1
    'intent', 2, [[0.5], [0.5]],    #1
    state_names={'intent': ['B', 'both']}    #1
)   #1
print(cpd_intent)
cpd_choice = TabularCPD(    #2
    'choice', 2, [[1, 0], [0, 1]],    #2
    evidence=['intent'],     #2
    evidence_card=[2],    #2
    state_names={     #2
        'choice': ['B', 'both'],     #2
        'intent': ['B', 'both']   #2
    }     #2
)   #2
print(cpd_choice)
#1 We assume a 50-50 chance the agent will prefer both boxes vs. box
B.
#2 We assume the agent’s choice is deterministically driven by their
intent.
Similarly, we’ll create the causal Markov kernels for the AI’s
decision and the content of box B.
Listing 12.10 Create causal Markov kernels for AI prediction and box B
content
cpd_AI = TabularCPD(     #1
    'AI prediction', 2, [[.95, 0.05], [.05, .95]],   #1
    evidence=['intent'],   #1
    evidence_card=[2],   #1
    state_names={    #1
        'AI prediction': ['B', 'both'],    #1
        'intent': ['B', 'both']    #1
    }    #1
)    #1
print(cpd_AI)
cpd_box_b_content = TabularCPD(    #2
    'box B', 2, [[0, 1], [1, 0]],    #2
    evidence=['AI prediction'],    #2
    evidence_card=[2],    #2
    state_names={    #2
        'box B': [0, 1000000],    #2
        'AI prediction': ['B', 'both']   #2
    }     #2
)    #2
print(cpd_box_b_content)
#1 The AI’s prediction is 95% accurate.
#2 Box B contents are set deterministically by the AI’s prediction.

Finally, we’ll create a causal Markov kernel for utility and add
all the kernels to the model.
Listing 12.11 Create utility kernel and build the model
cpd_u = TabularCPD(    #1
    'U', 4,    #1
    [    #1
        [1, 0, 0, 0],  #1
        [0, 1, 0, 0],   #1
        [0, 0, 1, 0],   #1
        [0, 0, 0, 1],    #1
    ],   #1
    evidence=['box B', 'choice'],    #1
    evidence_card=[2, 2],    #1
    state_names={    #1
        'U': [0, 1000, 1000000, 1001000],    #1
        'box B': [0, 1000000],    #1
        'choice': ['B', 'both']    #1
    }   #1
)    #1
print(cpd_u)
model.add_cpds(cpd_intent, cpd_choice, cpd_AI, cpd_box_b_content, cpd_u)  #2
#1 Set up the utility node.
#2 Build the model.
Now we’ll evaluate maximizing E(Uchoice=x|intent=i).

Listing 12.12 Infer optimal choice using intervention and conditioning
on intent
int_model_x_both = do(model, {"choice": "both"})    #1
infer_both = VariableElimination(int_model_x_both)   #1
marginal_u_given_both = infer_both.query(   #1
    variables=['U'], evidence={'intent': 'both'})    #1
expectation_u_given_both = get_expectation(marginal_u_given_both)    #1
print("E(U(Y_{choice=both}|intent=both))=", expectation_u_given_both)    #1
int_model_x_box_B = do(model, {"choice": "B"})     #2
infer_box_B = VariableElimination(int_model_x_box_B)    #2
marginal_u_given_box_B = infer_box_B.query(    #2
    variables=['U'], evidence={'intent': 'both'})     #2
expectation_u_given_box_B = get_expectation(marginal_u_given_box_B)    #2
print("E(U(Y_{choice=box B}|intent=both))=", expectation_u_given_box_B)    #2
int_model_x_both = do(model, {"choice": "both"})     #3
infer_both = VariableElimination(int_model_x_both)     #3
marginal_u_given_both = infer_both.query(     #3
    variables=['U'], evidence={'intent': 'B'})    #3
expectation_u_given_both = get_expectation(marginal_u_given_both)     #3
print("E(U(Y_{choice=both}|intent=B))=", expectation_u_given_both)     #3
int_model_x_box_B = do(model, {"choice": "B"})     #4
infer_box_B = VariableElimination(int_model_x_box_B)  #4
marginal_u_given_box_B = infer_box_B.query(    #4
    variables=['U'], evidence={'intent': 'B'}) #4
expectation_u_given_box_B = get_expectation(marginal_u_given_box_B)     #4
print("E(U(Y_{choice=box B}|intent=B))=", expectation_u_given_box_B)     #4
#1 Infer E(U(Y choice=both|intent=both)).
#2 Infer E(U(Y choice=box B|intent=both)).
#3 Infer E(U(Y choice=both|intent=B)).
#4 Infer E(U(Y choice=box B|intent=B)).
This code produces the following results (* indicates the
optimal choice for a given intent):
E(U(Ychoice=both|intent =both)) = 51000 *
E(U(Ychoice=box B|intent =both)) = 50000
E(U(Ychoice=both|intent =B)) = 951000 *
E(U(Ychoice=box B|intent =B)) = 950000
When the agent’s initial intention is to select both, the best
choice is to select both. When the agent intends to choose
only box B, the best choice is to ignore those intentions and
choose both. Either way, the agent should choose both. Note
that when the agent initially intends to choose only box B,
switching to both boxes gives them an expected utility of

$951,000 which is greater than the optimal choice utility of
$950,000 in the noncausal approach.
The agent, unfortunately, cannot control their initial intent; if
they could, they would deliberately ‘intend’ to pick box B and
then switch at the last minute to choosing both boxes after
the AI placed the million in box B. However, they can engage
in a form of introspection, factoring their initial intent into
their decision and, in so doing, accounting for the AI’s
behavior rather than ignoring it.
12.2.7 Introspection in causal decision theory
Newcomb’s problem illustrates a key capability of causal
decision theory—the ability for us to include introspection as
part of the DGP.
Figure 12.10 Often our actions are simply reactions to our environment,
rather than the result of deliberate decision-making.
To illustrate, consider that often our actions are simply
reactions to our environment, as in figure 12.10.
For example, you might have purchased a chocolate bar
because you were hungry and it was positioned to tempt you
as you waited in the checkout aisle of the grocery store.
Rather than go through some deliberative decision-making

process, you had a simple, perhaps even unconscious,
reaction to your craving and an easy way to satisfy it.
However, humans are capable of introspection—observing
and thinking about their internal states. A human might
consider their normal reactive behavior as part of the DGP.
This introspection is illustrated in figure 12.11.
Figure 12.11 Humans and some other agents can think about a DGP that
includes them as a component of that process.
Through this introspection, the agent can perform level 2
hierarchical reasoning about what would happen if they did
not react as usual but acted deliberately (e.g., sticking to
their diet and not buying the chocolate bar), as in figure
12.12.

Figure 12.12 The agent reasons about a DGP that includes them as a
component. They then use that reasoning in asking level 2 “what would
happen if...” questions about that process.
In many cases, the agent may not know the full state of their
environment. However, if the agent can disentangle their
urge to react a certain way from their action, they can use
that “urge” as evidence in deliberative decision-making, as
in figure 12.13.

Figure 12.13 The agent may not know the states of other variables in
the environment, but through introspection, they may have an intuition
about those variables. That intuition can be used as evidence in
conditional causal inferences.
We saw this pattern in the Newcomb example; the agent
does not know what the AI has predicted, but, through
introspection, they can use their initial intention to choose
both boxes as evidence of what the AI has chosen.

Was there ever a time where you noticed you had started to
make clumsy errors in your work and used that as evidence
that you were fatigued, even though you didn’t feel so, and
you thought, “what if I take a break?” Have you had a gut
feeling that something was off, despite not knowing what,
and based on this feeling started to make different
decisions? Causal modeling, particularly with causal
generative models, make it easy to write algorithms that
capture this type of self-introspection in decision-making.
Next, we’ll look at causal modeling of sequential decision-
making.
12.3 Causal DAGs and sequential
decisions
Sequential decision processes are processes of back-to-back
decision-making. These processes can involve sequential
decisions made by humans or by algorithms and engineered
agents.
When I model decision processes in sequence, I use a
subscript to indicate a discrete step in the series, such as Y1,
Y2, Y3. When I want to indicate an intervention subscript, I’ll
place it to the right of the time-step subscript, as in Y1, X= x,
Y2,X= x, Y3, X= x.
In this section, I’ll show causal DAGs for several canonical
sequential decision-making processes, but you should view
these as templates, not as fixed structures. You can add or
remove edges in whatever way you deem appropriate for a
given problem.
Let’s look at the simplest case, bandit feedback.

12.3.1 Bandit feedback
Bandit feedback refers to cases where, at each step in the
sequence, there is an act X that leads to an outcome Y, with
some utility U (Y  ). A bandit sequence has two key features.
The first is that, at every step, there is instant feedback after
an act occurs. The second is independent trials, meaning
that the variables at the t  th timestep are independent of
variables at other timesteps. The term “bandit” comes from
an analogy to “one-armed bandits,” which is a slang term for
casino slot machines that traditionally have an arm that the
player pulls to initiate gameplay. Slot machine gameplay
provides bandit feedback—you deposit a token, pull the arm,
and instantly find out if you win or lose. That outcome is
independent of previous plays.
We can capture bandit feedback with the causal DAG in
figure 12.14.
Figure 12.14 A causal DAG illustrating simple bandit feedback
The causal DAG in figure 12.14 captures instant feedback
with a utility node at each timestep, and with a lack of
edges, reflecting an independence of variables across
timesteps.
12.3.2 Contextual bandit feedback
In contextual bandit feedback, one or more variables are
common causes for both the act and the outcome. In figure

12.15, the context variable C is common to each {X, Y  }
tuple in the sequence. In this case, the context variable C
could represent the profile of a particular individual, and the
act variable X is that user’s behavior.
Figure 12.15 A causal DAG illustrating contextual bandit feedback
Alternatively, the context variable could change at each
step, as in figure 12.16.
Figure 12.16 A causal DAG illustrating contextual bandit feedback
where the context changes at each timestep
We can vary this template in different ways. For example, we
could have the actions drive the context variables in the next

timestep, as in figure 12.17. The choice depends on your
specific problem.
Figure 12.17 A causal DAG where the action at one timestep influences
the context at the next timestep
12.3.3 Delayed feedback
In a delayed-feedback setting, the outcome variable and
corresponding utility are no longer instant feedback. Instead,
they come at the end of a sequence. Let’s consider an
example where a context variable drives the acts. The acts
affect the next instance of the context variable.
Figure 12.18 Example of a causal DAG for sequential decision making
with delayed feedback

Again, figure 12.18 shows an example of this approach
based on the previous model. Here the act at time k
influences the context variable (C  ) at time k + 1, which in
turn affects the act at time k + 1.
Consider a case of chronic pain. Here the context variable
represents whether a subject is experiencing pain (C  ). The
presence of pain drives the act of taking a painkiller (X  ).
Taking the painkiller (or not) affects whether there is pain in
the next step. Figure 12.19 illustrates this DAG.
Figure 12.19 A causal DAG representing the treatment of chronic pain
Y here is the ultimate health outcome of the subject, and it is
driven both by the overall amount of pain over time, and the
amount of drugs the subject took (because perhaps overuse
of painkillers has a detrimental health effect).
12.3.4 Causal queries on a sequential model
We may want to calculate some causal query for our
sequential decision problem. For example, given the DAG in
figure 12.19, we might want to calculate the causal effect of
X0 on U(Y  ):

Or perhaps we might be interested in the causal effect of the
full sequence of acts on U(Y  ):
Either way, now that we have framed the sequential problem
as a causal model, we are in familiar territory; we can simply
use the causal inference tools we’ve learned in previous
chapters to answer causal queries with this model.
As usual, we must be attentive to the possibility of latent
causes that can confound our causal inference. In the case of
causal effects, our concern is latent common confounding
causes between acts (X  ) and outcomes (Y  ), or alternatively
between acts (X ) and utilities (U  ). Figure 12.20 is the same
as figure 12.15, except it introduces a latent Z confounder.
Figure 12.20 Contextual bandit with a latent confounder
Similarly, we could have a unique confounder at every
timestep, as in figure 12.21.

Figure 12.21 Bandit feedback with a different context and latent
confounders at each timestep
Similarly, figure 12.22 shows a second version of the chronic
pain graph where the confounders affect each other and the
context variables. This confounder could be some external
factor in the subject’s environment that triggers the pain and
affects well-being.
These confounders become an issue when we want to infer
the causal effect of a sequence of actions on U (Y  ).

Figure 12.22 A version of the chronic pain DAG where the confounders
affect each other and the context variables
Next, we’ll look at how we can view policies for automatic
decision making in sequential decision-making processes as
stochastic interventions.
12.4 Policies as stochastic
interventions
In automated sequential decision-making, the term “policy”
is preferred to “decision rule.” I’ll introduce a special
notation for a policy: π(.). It will be a function that takes in
observed outcomes of other variables and returns an action.
To consider how a policy affects the model, we’ll contrast the
DAG before and after a policy is implemented. Figure 12.23
illustrates a simple example with a context variable C and a
latent variable Z. The policy uses context C to select a value
of X.

Figure 12.23 The dashed lines show edges modulated by the policy. The
policy breaks the influence of the confounder Z like an ideal
intervention, but dependence on C remains through the policy.
The policy is a type of stochastic intervention; it selects a
intervention value for X from some process that depends on
C. Like an ideal intervention, it changes the graph. The left of
figure 12.23 shows the DAG prior to deployment of the
policy. On the right is the DAG after the policy is deployed. I
add a special policy node to the graph to illustrate how the
policy modulates the graph. The dashed edges highlight
edges modulated by the policy. Just like an ideal intervention,
the policy-generated intervention removes X’s original
incoming edges C  →X and Z  →X. However, because the
policy depends on C, the dashed edges illustrate the new
flow of influence from C to X.
Suppose we are interested in what value Y would have for a
policy-selected action X = Π. In counterfactual notation, we
write
In sequence settings, the policy applies a stochastic
intervention at multiple steps in the sequence. From a
possible worlds perspective, each intervention induces a new
hypothetical world. This can stretch the counterfactual

notation a bit, so going forward, I’ll simplify the
counterfactual notation to look like this:
This means Y3 (Y at timestep 3) is under influence of the
policy’s outcomes at times 0, 1, and 2.
12.4.1 Examples in sequential decision-making
In the case of bandit feedback, the actions are produced by a
bandit algorithm, which is a type of policy that incorporates
the entire history of actions and utility outcomes in deciding
the optimal current action. Though actions and outcomes in
the bandit feedback process are independent at each time
step, the policy introduces dependence on past actions and
outcomes, as shown in figure 12.24.

Figure 12.24 Bandit feedback where a bandit policy algorithm selects
the next action based on past actions and reward outcomes
Recall our previous example of an agent taking pain
medication in response to the onset of pain. Figure 12.25

shows how a policy would take in the history of degree of
pain and how much medication was provided.
Figure 12.25 In the pain example, the policy considers the history of
recorded levels of pain and corresponding dosages of medication.
The policy is like a doctor making the rounds on a hospital
floor. They come to a patient’s bed, and the patient reports

some level of pain. The doctor looks at that patient’s history
of pain reports and the subsequent dosages of medication
and uses that information to decide what dosage to provide
this time. The doctor’s utility function is in terms of pain, risk
of overdose, and risk of addiction. They need to consider
historic data, not just the current level of pain, to optimize
this utility function.
12.4.2 How policies can introduce confounding
As stochastic interventions, policies introduce interventions
conditional on other nodes in the graph. Because of this,
there is a possibility that the policy will introduce new
backdoor paths that can confound causal inferences. For
example, consider again the DAG in figure 12.26.
Figure 12.26 The policy eliminates the backdoor path through Z but not
the backdoor path through C.
The policy breaks the backdoor path from X to Y through Z,
but there is still a path from X to Y through C. Thus, typical
causal queries involving X and Y would have to condition on
or adjust for C.
In the next section, we’ll characterize causal RL in causal
terms.

12.5 Causal reinforcement learning
Reinforcement learning (RL) is a branch of machine learning
that generally involves an agent learning policies that
maximize cumulative reward (utility). The agent learns from
the consequences of its actions, rather than from being
explicitly taught, and adjusts its behavior based on the
rewards or losses (reinforcements) it receives. Many
sequential decision-making problems can be cast as RL
problems.
12.5.1 Connecting causality and Markov
decision processes
RL typically casts a decision process as a Markov decision
process (MDP). A canonical toy example of an MDP is a grid
world, illustrated in figure 12.27.
Figure 12.27 presents a 3 × 4 grid world. An agent can act
within this grid world with a fixed set of actions, moving up,
down, left, and right. The agent wants to execute a set of
actions that deliver it to the upper-right corner {0, 3}, where
it gains a reward of 100. The agent wants to avoid the
middle-right square {1, 3}, where it has a reward of –100 (a
loss of 100). Position {1, 1} contains an obstacle the agent
cannot traverse.
Figure 12.27 A simple grid world

We can think of it as a game. When the game starts, the
agent “spawns” randomly in one of the squares, except for
{0, 3}, {1, 3}, and {1, 1}. When the agent moves into a
goal square, the game ends. To win, the agent must navigate
around the obstacle in {1, 1}, avoid {1, 3}, and reach {0,
3}.
A Markov decision process models this and much more
complicated “worlds” (aka domains, problems, etc.) with
abstractions for states, actions, transition functions, and
rewards.
STATES
States are a set that represents the current situation or
context that the agent is in, within its environment. In the
grid-world example, a state represents the agent being at a
specific cell. In this grid, there are 12 different states (the
cell at {1, 1} is an unreachable state). We assume the agent
has some way of knowing which state they are in.
We’ll denote state as a variable S. In a grid world, S is a
discrete variable, but in other problems, S could be
continuous.
ACTIONS
Actions are the things the agent can do, and they lead to a
change of state. Some actions might not be available when
in a particular state. For example, in the grid world, the
borders of the grid are constraints on the movements of the
agent. If the agent is in the bottom-left square {2, 0}, and
they try to move left or down, they will stay in place.
Similarly, the cell at {1, 1} is an obstacle the agent must
navigate around. We denote actions with the variable A,
which has four possible outcomes {up, down, right, left}.

TRANSITION FUNCTION
The transition function is a probability distribution function. It
tells us the probability of moving to a specific next state,
given the current state and the action taken.
If states are discrete, the transition function looks like this:
Here, St  = s means the agent is currently in state s. At  = a
means the agent performs action a. P (S t +1 = s'|St  = s, At  = 
a) is the probability that the agent transitions to a new state
s' given it is in state s and performs action a. When the
action leads to a new state with complete certainty, this
probability distribution function becomes degenerate (all
probability is concentrated on one value).
REWARDS
The term “reward” is preferred to “utility” in RL. In the
context of MDPs, the reward function will always take a state
s as an argument. We will write it as U (s ).
In the grid-world example, U ({0, 3}) = 100, U ({1, 3)) = –
100. The reward of all other states is 0. Note that sometimes
in the MDP/RL literature, U () is a function of state and an
action, as in U (s, a ). We don’t lose anything by just having
actions be a function of state because you can always fold
actions into the definition of a state.
12.5.2 The MDP as a causal DAG
Figure 12.28 shows the MDP as a causal DAG.

Figure 12.28 The Markov decision process represented as a DAG
As a causal DAG, the MDP looks like the other sequential
decision processes we’ve outlined, except that we limit
ourselves to states, actions, and rewards. In figure 12.28, the
process continues until we reach a terminal state (Sk), such
as getting to the terminal cells in the grid-world example.
THE CAUSAL MARKOV PROPERTY AND THE MDP
The “Markov” in “Markov decision process” comes from the
fact that the current state is independent of the full history
of states given the last state. Contrast this with the causal
Markov property of causal DAGs: a node in the DAG is
independent of indirect “ancestor” causes given its direct
causal parents. We can see that when we view the MDP as a
causal DAG, this Markovian assumption is equivalent to the
causal Markov property. That means we can use our d-
separation-based causal reasoning, including the do-
calculus, in the MDP graphical setting.

THE TRANSITION FUNCTION AND THE CAUSAL MARKOV
KERNEL
Note that based on this DAG, the parents of a state S(t+1) are
the previous state St and the action At taken when in that
previous state. Therefore, the causal Markov kernel is P (S t 
+1 = s'|St  = s, At  = a), i.e., the transition function. Thus, the
transition function is the causal Markov kernel for a given
state.
12.5.3 Partially observable MDPs
An extension of MDPs is partially observed MDPs (POMDPs).
In a POMDP, the agent doesn’t know with certainty what
state they are in, and they must make inferences about that
state given incomplete evidence from their environment.
This applies to many practical problems where the agent
cannot observe the full state of the environment.
A POMDP can entail different causal structures depending on
our assumptions about the causal relationships between the
unobserved and observed states. For example, suppose a
latent state S is a cause of the observed state X. The
observed state X now drives the act A instead of S. Figure
12.29 illustrates this formulation of a POMDP as a causal
DAG.

Figure 12.29 A POMDP where a latent state S causes an observed state
X. X drives the actions A.
In contrast, figure 12.30 illustrates an example where the
latent state is a latent common cause (denoted Z) of the
observed state (mediated through the agent’s action) and
the utility (note a slight change of notation from U (Si) to Ui ).
Here, unobserved factors influence both the agent’s
behavior and the resulting utility of that behavior.
Again, the basic MDP and POMDP DAGs should be seen as
templates for starting our analysis. Once we understand
what causal queries we are interested in answering, we can
explicitly represent various components of observed and
unobserved states as specific nodes in the graph, and then
use identification and adjustment techniques to answer our
causal queries.

Figure 12.30 A POMPD formulation where the unobserved states are
latent common causes that could act as confounders in causal
inferences
12.5.4 Policy in an MDP
As before, policies in an MDP act as stochastic interventions.
Figure 12.31 illustrates a policy that selects an optimal
action based on the current state in a way that disrupts any
influence on the action from a confounder.

Figure 12.31 Modification of an MDP DAG by a policy

Figure 12.31 is simple in that it only selects an action based
on the current state. The challenge is in the implementation,
because in most RL settings, states can be high-dimensional
objects.
12.5.5 Causal Bellman equation
RL is about searching for the optimal policy, which is
characterized with the Bellman equation, often written as
follows:
In plain words, we’re looking for a policy Π* maximizes the
cumulative reward over time. Here γ is a discount rate, a
value between 0 and 1, that makes sure the agent values
rewards in the near future more than rewards in the far
future.
Since we’re reasoning about what would happen if we
deployed the policy, the causal formulation would be as
follows:
Note that we could do the same causal rewrite for other
variants of the Bellman equation, such as the Q-function
used in Q-learning.
The difference between the noncausal and causal
formulations of the Bellman equation is the same as the
difference between optimizing E (U (Y  )|X=x ) and E (U (YX=x ))

in section 12.2.4. The process of solving the causally naive
version of the Bellman equation may introduce biases from
latent confounders or from conditioning on colliders and
mediators. Our causally attuned approach can help avoid
these biases. In many cases, the solution of the naive
approach will coincide with the causal approach because
those biases might not affect the ranking of the top policy
relative to others. However, as in the E (U(Y  )|X = x ) versus E 
(U (YX=x)) example, there will be cases where the solutions to
the noncausal and causal formulations differ, and your RL
problem might be one of those cases.
12.6 Counterfactual reasoning for
decision-theory
So far, we’ve discussed the problem of choosing optimal
actions with respect to a utility function as a level 2 query on
the causal hierarchy. Is there a use for level 3 counterfactual
reasoning in decision theory? In this section, we’ll briefly
review some applications for level 3 reasoning.
12.6.1 Counterfactual policy evaluation
Counterfactual policy evaluation involves taking logged data
from a policy in production and asking, “given we used this
policy and got this cumulative reward, how much cumulative
reward would we have gotten had we used a different
policy?” See the chapter notes at
https://www.altdeep.ai/p/causalaibook for references to
techniques such as counterfactually guided policy search
and counterfactual risk minimization.

12.6.2 Counterfactual regret minimization
In chapters 8 and 9, I introduced regret as a counterfactual
concept. We can further clarify the idea now that we have
introduced the language of decision-making; regret is the
difference between the utility/reward that was realized given
a specific action or set of actions, and the utility/reward that
would have been realized had another action or set of
actions been taken.
Counterfactual regret minimization is an approach to
optimizing policies that seeks to minimize regret. To
illustrate, suppose we have a policy variable Π, which can
return one of several available policies. The policies take in
the context and return an action. The action leads to some
reward U.
Suppose, for a single instance in our logged data, the policy
was Π=π and the context was C =c. We get a certain action
A =π(c ) and reward U =u. For some policy π', regret is the
answer to the counterfactual question, “How much more
reward would we have gotten if the policy had been π = π'?”
In terms of expectation,
Again, this is regret for a single instance in logged data
where the context was C =c and the utility was u. There are
many variations, but the general idea is to find the policy
that would have minimized cumulative regret over all the
cases of C =c in the logged data, with the goal of favoring
that policy in cases of C =c in the future.

12.6.3 Making level 3 assumptions in decision
problems
The question, of course, is how to make the level 3
assumptions that enable counterfactual inferences. One
approach would be to specify an SCM and use the general
algorithm for counterfactual reasoning (discussed in chapter
9). For example, in RL, the transition function P (S t +1 = s'|St  
= s, At  = a) captures the rules of state changes in the
environment. As I mentioned, P (S t +1|St  = s, At  = a) is the
causal Markov kernel for a given state S t +1. We could
specify an SCM with an assignment function that entails that
causal Markov kernel, and write that assignment function as
Here, ns' is the value of an exogenous variable for St.
The challenge is specifying assignment functions that
encode the correct counterfactual distributions. This is easier
in domains where we know more about the underlying causal
mechanisms. A key example is in rule-based games; game
rules can provide the level 3 constraints that enable
simulation of counterfactuals. Recall how, in chapter 9, the
simple rules of the Monte Hall problem enabled us to
simulate counterfactual outcomes for stay versus switch
strategies. Or consider multiplayer games like poker, where
in a round of play each player is dealt a hand of cards and
can take certain actions (check, bet, call, raise, or fold) that
lead to outcomes (win, lose, tie) based on simple rules,
which in turn determine the amount of chips won or lost in
that round. A player’s counterfactual regret is the difference
between the chips they netted and the most they could have
netted had they decided on different actions. This is done

while accounting for the information available at the time of
the decision, not using hindsight about the opponents’ cards.
Counterfactual regret minimization algorithms in this domain
attempt to find game playing policies that minimize
counterfactual regret across multiple players. The concrete
rules of the game enable simulation of counterfactual game
trajectories. The challenge lies in searching for optimal
policies within a space of possible counterfactual trajectories
that is quite large because of multiple player interactions
over several rounds of play. See the chapter notes on
counterfactual regret minimization in multiagent games at
https://www.altdeep.ai/p/causalaibook for references.
Summary
Decision-making is naturally a causal problem because
decisions cause consequences, and our goal is to make
the decision that leads to favorable consequences.
Choosing the optimal decision is a level 2 query as we
are asking “what would happen if I made this decision?”
E (U (Y  |X =x )) and E (U (YX=x )) are different quantities.
Usually, people want to know the value of X that
optimizes E (U (YX=x )), but optimizing E (U (Y  |X = x )) will
often yield the same answer without the bother of
specifying a causal model.
This is especially true in reinforcement learning (RL),
where the analogs to E (U (Y  |X =x)) and E (U (YX=x)) are,
respectively, the conventional and causal formulations of
the Bellman equation. Confounder, mediator, and
collider 
biases 
may 
be 
present 
in 
conventional
approaches to solving the Bellman equation. But those
bias often don’t influence the ranking of the top policy
relative to other policies.

Nonetheless, sometimes the value of X that optimizes E 
(U (Y  |X =x)) is different from that which optimizes E (U 
(YX=x )). Similarly, addressing causal nuances when
solving the Bellman equation may result in a different
policy than ignoring them. If your decision problem falls
into this category, causal approaches are the better
choice.
Newcomb’s paradox is a thought experiment meant to
contrast causal and noncausal approaches to decision
theory. The “paradox” is less mysterious once we use a
formal causal model.
Causal decision theory, combined with probabilistic
modeling tools like Pyro and pgmpy, is well suited to
modeling introspection, where an agent reflects on their
internal state (feelings, intuition, urges, intent) and uses
that information to predict the “what-if” outcomes of
their decisions.
When we represent a sequential decision process with a
causal DAG, we can employ all the tools of graphical
causal inference in that decision problem.
Policies operate like stochastic interventions. They
change the graph but still have dependence on observed
nodes in the past, and that dependence can introduce
backdoor confounding.
In causal RL, we can represent MDPs and POMDPs as
causal DAGs and, again, make use of graphical causal
inference theory.
We can use template DAGs to represent sequential
decision processes, but you should tailor these templates
for your problem.
Common use cases for counterfactual reasoning in
decision theory are counterfactual policy evaluation and
counterfactual regret minimization.

If you have access to the rules underlying state
transitions in your MDP, such as in physical systems or
games, you could build an SCM that is counter- factually
faithful 
to 
those 
rules, 
and 
use 
it 
to 
handle
counterfactual use cases in decision-making.

13 Causality and large
language models
This chapter covers
Using causal information in LLMs to enhance a causal
analysis
Connecting the components of an LLM to a causal ideas
Building a causal LLM
Large language models (LLMs) represent a significant
advancement in the field of artificial intelligence. These
models are large neural networks designed to generate and
understand human-readable text. They are “large” because
their scale is truly impressive—cutting-edge LLMs have
parameters numbering in the billions and trillions. As
generative models, their main function is to generate
coherent and contextually relevant natural language. They
can also generate structured text, such as programming
code, markup languages, mathematical symbols, database
queries, and many other useful things in text form.
LLMs are just one example of a broad class of generative AI.
For example, we can use the neural network architecture
underlying cutting-edge LLMs to model other sequences,
such as time-series or DNA. LLMs are a type of foundation
model, meaning large-scale models that serve as a base or
foundation upon which more specialized models or
applications can be built. Some LLMs are multimodal,
meaning they work with text as well as other content
modalities, such as images. In this chapter, we’ll focus

specifically on LLMs, but much of what we discuss can be
generalized to these related ideas.
To start, let’s explore some use cases for using LLMs to
enhance a causal analysis.
13.1 LLMs as a causal knowledgebase
As I’ve mentioned several times in this book, in causal
modeling, we don’t model the data, we model the data
generating process (DGP). In other words, causal modeling
requires causal information about the DGP that we can use
as assumptions that enable identification of our causal
queries. Cutting-edge LLMs are excellent resources for
sourcing and validating that causal information. In this
section, I’ll demonstrate some proven use cases for using
LLMs to query causal information that augments a causal
analysis.
The following results come from OpenAI’s LLM GPT-4 via the
ChatGPT interface. Because of the random generation from
the model, and OpenAI’s periodic updates to the model and
ChatGPT software, your results will vary from mine to some
degree.
13.1.1 Building a causal DAG
Let’s start with using the LLM to augment the first workflow
we discussed in this book: building the causal DAG.
Specifying assumptions in the form of a causal DAG can be
daunting. What if your DAG is wrong? Modern LLMs are
invaluable as a way of leveraging public expert knowledge to
build a DAG.

You are a helpful causal analysis assistant. I’m
interested in modeling the relationship between
smoking and lung cancer. Provide me a causal DAG that
captures this causal relationship.
Certainly! A Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) is a
powerful tool to represent causal relationships. Here’s a
basic causal DAG to represent the relationship between
smoking and lung cancer:
1. Nodes:
S: Smoking behavior (e.g., smoker, non-smoker, or
frequency of smoking)
LC: Lung Cancer (presence or absence)
2. Directed Edge:
A directed edge from S to LC represents that smoking
behavior can cause or influence the occurrence of lung
cancer.
3. Potential Confounders:
Other nodes can be introduced into the DAG to account
for potential confounders. Some potential confounders
might be:
a. G: Genetics (a family history of lung cancer)
b. A: Age (older age might be associated with a higher
risk)
c. E: Environmental exposure (like asbestos, pollution,
etc.)
d. O: Other health behaviors (like diet, exercise)
4. Potential Mediators:
Mediators are intermediate variables through which a
cause exerts its effect on an outcome.

For instance, one could hypothesize that smoking
might cause lung damage, which in turn causes lung
cancer. In this case:
a. LD: Lung Damage
The DAG might look like this with the confounders and
the mediator:
1. S <- G –> LC
2. S <- A –> LC
3. S <- E –> LC
4. S <- O –> LC
5. S –> LC
6. S –> LD –> LC
In the process of modeling, it’s important to:
Identify all potential confounders to avoid biased
results. Remember that correlation does not imply
causation. Just because two nodes are correlated does
not mean one causes the other.
Validate your DAG with domain experts. They can
provide insights into relationships you might not have
considered.
Use data to test and validate the causal relationships in
your DAG, e.g., through controlled experiments or
statistical 
methods 
like 
instrumental 
variables 
or
propensity score matching when experiments are not
feasible.
Bear in mind that this is a simplified DAG for the
relationship 
between 
smoking 
and 
lung 
cancer.
Depending on the granularity and depth of your study,
you might need to adjust and expand this framework.

Continuing, I can prompt the LLM to provide potential
instrumental variables.
Suggest two good candidates for instrumental
variables. Be brief in your response.
Certainly. For the relationship between smoking
and lung cancer, two potential instrumental variables
(IVs) could be:
1. Cigarette Tax or Price: If certain regions or periods
have higher cigarette prices or taxes, this can influence
smoking behavior without directly influencing lung
cancer rates except through the effect of reduced
smoking. The assumption here is that the only way
cigarette prices could affect lung cancer is by influencing
smoking behavior.
2. Anti-Smoking 
Campaigns 
or 
Legislation:
Introduction or intensity of anti-smoking campaigns or
legislation in certain regions or times can be used as an
instrument. If these campaigns or laws are exogenously
determined (not based on current lung cancer rates),
they can affect smoking rates without having a direct
effect on lung cancer, except through their impact on
smoking behavior.
For both IVs, it’s crucial to validate the two key
assumptions of instrument validity:
1. The instrument is related to the exposure (e.g., cigarette
tax affects smoking behavior).
2. The instrument affects the outcome (e.g., lung cancer)
only through its effect on the exposure and not through

other pathways.
PROMPTING BEST PRACTICE
The prompt preface “You are a helpful causal analysis
assistant” is an example of what is sometimes called a
“system prompt.” System prompts provide general context
about what is expected from the LLM. System prompting,
and other prompt engineering techniques (e.g., chain-of-
thought prompting, in-context learning) are best practices
for getting good generations from LLMs. For the sake of
brevity, I’ll use system prompts but omit some of the other
prompt engineering best practices in this section—it is
smart to include them in practical settings.
Continuing to interact with the LLM in this way, perhaps
through multiple sessions, you can come up with a candidate
DAG that makes sense to you and your stakeholders. Next,
you can prompt the LLM to give you code to run an analysis.
13.1.2 Generating code for DAGs, models, and
causal analyses
Modern LLMs are trained on vast corpora of code from a wide
variety of programming languages. This greatly speeds up
causal analyses, particularly if the libraries you’re using are
represented in the training data. For example, we can
prompt ChatGPT to implement its suggested lung cancer
DAG in DoWhy and estimate the causal effect.
Provide me with code that uses the DoWhy library
in Python to implement the causal DAG that you
suggested above. Include cigarette price as an

instrumental variable and provide code for estimating
the causal effect.
Certainly! Here’s a basic example using the
DoWhy library in Python for implementing the causal
DAG for the relationship between smoking and lung
cancer, using cigarette price as an instrumental
variable.
SETTING UP YOUR ENVIRONMENT
The code in this chapter was written with DoWhy version
0.11, Transformers version 4.38.2, Accelerate version
0.28.0, pandas 2.0.3, NumPy 1.25.2, and pyro-ppl (Pyro)
version 1.9.0. Visit the chapter notes at
https://www.altdeep.ai/p/causalaibook for a link to a
notebook containing the chapter’s code.
Chat GTP then went on to generate the following code.

Listing 13.1 DoWhy code generated by ChatGPT (verbatim)
import numpy as np
import pandas as pd
import dowhy
from dowhy import CausalModel
from dowhy.datasets import linear_dataset
from dowhy.do_why import CausalModel    #1
# Let's create a sample dataset for illustration purposes
# Normally, you'd import your own dataset: data = pd.read_csv('your_dataset.csv')
n_points = 1000
data = pd.DataFrame({
    "S": np.random.binomial(n=1, p=0.5, size=n_points),     #2
    "LC": np.random.binomial(n=1, p=0.5, size=n_points),    #3
    "Price": np.random.normal(loc=5, scale=1, size=n_points),     #4
})
# Create a causal DAG
model=CausalModel(
        data = data,
        treatment='S',
        outcome='LC',
        common_causes=['G', 'A', 'E', 'O'],  # Potential confounders
        instruments=['Price']  # Instrumental Variable
)
# Identify the causal effect
identified_estimand = model.identify_effect(proceed_when_unidentifiable=True)
# Estimate the causal effect using Instrumental Variable method
estimate = model.estimate_effect(identified_estimand,
                                 method_name="iv.instrumental_variable",
                                 method_params={'iv_instrument_name': 'Price'})
# Print the causal effect estimate
print(estimate)
#1 This line is wrong, but the code runs if you remove it.
#2 Simulate smoker status: 0 for non-smoker, 1 for smoker.
#3 Simulate lung cancer status: 0 for no lung cancer, 1 for lung cancer.
#4 Simulate cigarette price with a mean price of 5.
This is a simplified example. In a real-world
application:
1. Your data would be imported rather than simulated as
above.
2. Ensure that your DAG correctly models the relationships
based on domain knowledge.

3. Assumptions behind the instrumental variables need to
be rigorously checked.
4. Further analytical steps (e.g., statistical tests, checking
robustness) would be necessary.
When you generate code, you may get errors. For example,
DoWhy has gone through several iterations, and there is
nothing forcing the LLM to keep up with the latest version of
the library. In this case, there is an error in the line from
dowhy.do_why import CausalModel. There is no module called
do_why, and CausalModel is already imported in a previous line.
We’ll address errors produced by the LLM in section 13.1.7.
For now, if you delete that line, the code will run.
ChatGPT will work well with pgmpy and Pyro, the libraries
we’ve worked with extensively in the book. As an exercise, I
suggest taking one of the models you built in pgmpy, and
prompting the LLM to convert it to a model in Pyro.
Next, we’ll look at what the LLM can tell us beyond the
structure of the DAG.
13.1.3 Explanations and mechanism
The advantage of DAGs is that graphs are an intuitive way to
represent what causes what. But they do not tell us anything
about the nature of the mechanism by which a cause drives
an effect.
Structural causal models provide a mathematical way of
characterizing the mechanism underlying a causal
relationship. Characterizing mechanisms in mathematical
terms makes sense in natural sciences, where we have
plenty of equations describing natural laws. It is harder in,
for example, business domains where we lack equations

beyond mere approximations (what is the equation relating
ad spending and engagement?).
LLMs leverage common and expert knowledge to provide
mechanistic explanations that go beyond the DAG but that
are in a form more accessible than formal math.
You are a helpful causal explanation generator.
Provide a characterization of the causal relationship
between ad spending and brand awareness. Be concise
enough to fit a single slide in a slide deck.
Causal Relationship Between Ad Spending and
Brand Awareness
Direct Causality: As ad spending increases, brand
awareness typically rises.
a. Mechanism: Larger ad spends mean more frequent
and widespread exposure of the brand to the target
audience.
Diminishing Returns: After a certain point, additional
ad spending might not lead to proportionally higher
brand awareness.
a. Reason: Market saturation, ad fatigue, or redundancy
in audience reach.
External Factors: Ad efficiency isn’t solely based on
spend.
a. Influences: Ad quality, placement, target audience
relevancy, competition, and market conditions can
affect the outcome.
Consider that some counterfactual queries can be identified,
with simple categorical assumptions about the functional

relationship between the cause and effect. For example, the
probability of necessity is identifiable from intervention data
and partially identifiable from observational data if the
relationship between X and Y is monotonic:
Is this a monotonic relationship? Limit your
answer to one sentence.
Yes, the relationship between ad spending and
brand awareness is generally monotonic, as increased
ad spending will not decrease brand awareness, though
the rate of increase might diminish.
We needn’t limit ourselves to one explanation; we can use
the LLM as a generator of explanatory hypotheses. Consider,
for example, abductive reasoning tasks where one infers
likely causes of a particular observed set of effects (e.g., in
science, criminal investigation, and medical diagnosis).
To illustrate, let’s pose a modified version of a medical
diagnostic question sourced from the US Medical License
Exam to ChatGPT. I’ll prompt for multiple hypotheses about
the cause of the observed symptoms, which is what a doctor
would call a differential diagnosis:
You are a causal explanation assistant. Your job is
to generate 3 one sentence-long hypotheses that
explain the observations. This is a medical diagnosis
example.
Observations: A 48-year-old woman presents with
diplopia, ocular pain, amenorrhea, hot flashes, weight

loss, tachycardia, hypertension, moist palms, enlarged
thyroid, prominent eyes, lid retraction, conjunctival
injection, and inability to converge eyes. Visual acuity is
20/20 bilaterally.
1. 
 The patient may have Graves’ disease, an
autoimmune disorder affecting the thyroid, leading to
hyperthyroidism and its associated symptoms, including
ocular manifestations.
One of the challenges of causal modeling is working with
domain experts to encode domain assumptions into the
structure of the model. These types of generated
explanations and hypotheses are valuable assets for
communicating with domain experts who might agree with,
or better yet, iterate upon these generated explanations.
13.1.4 The causal frame problem and AI
alignment
Given a query of interest, we have to decide what variables
are relevant to the problem. Philosoper and AI researcher
Clark Glymour does a good job of describing the challenge
behind this task: “Given an enormous amount of stuff, and
some task to be done using some of the stuff, what is the
relevant stuff for the task?”1
The woman’s symptoms, including amenorrhea and hot
flashes, 
suggest 
a 
possible 
concomitant 
early
menopause or another endocrine disorder affecting her
reproductive hormones.
2.
The ocular symptoms, including diplopia, lid retraction,
and inability to converge eyes, hint at a potential thyroid
eye disease or orbital myopathy.
3.

LLMs are useful at establishing a causal frame—the problem
of selecting the causal variables relevant to a causal query.
In chapter 3’s discussion on building the DAG, I mentioned
causal sufficiency as a d-separation–based criteria for
selecting variables for inclusion in the DAG. But when we
prompted the LLM to provide a DAG containing variables
relevant to smoking’s effect on lung cancer, it is highly
doubtful that the LLM was using causal sufficiency to select
those variables. More likely, it was using common knowledge
found in its training data about this relationship. That
knowledge was sufficient to provide a reasonably minimal
set of relevant variables.
To illustrate the utility of this ability, consider the following
ChatGPT interaction:
You are a helpful causal reasoning assistant.
Consider the following story.
Jake is on an office network. There was an open shared
folder on the server. Jake is transferring files across the
network and accidentally clicks on the folder, starting a
process that consumes a significant amount of
bandwidth. This causes the network to slow down. How
responsible is Jake for the network slowdown?
Based on the provided story, let’s analyze the
situation using causal reasoning:
1. Direct Cause: Jake started a process that consumes a
significant amount of bandwidth by accidentally clicking
on a file.

2. Effect: The network slowed down due to the consumed
bandwidth.
Given these facts, we can establish that Jake’s action
was the direct cause of the network slowdown.
However, responsibility can be considered from
different dimensions:
1. Intent: Jake’s action was accidental. He did not intend to
slow down the network.
2. Prevention Mechanisms: The story does not specify if
there were any warnings or user prompts before starting
such a process that consumes significant bandwidth. If
there were no warnings, one could argue that the system
was not designed to prevent such accidental actions.
3. Knowledge & Training: Was Jake trained or informed
about the implications of transferring large files or about
the particular file that consumes a lot of bandwidth? If
not, his knowledge gap contributed to the accident.
4. System Design: The open shared folder on the server
was accessible to Jake. If the file was known to be a
bandwidth hog, it’s worth asking why such a file was
placed in an open shared folder without any warnings or
restrictions.
To directly answer the question: Jake is responsible for
the network slowdown in the sense that his action was
the direct cause. However, the degree of his
responsibility might be mitigated if there were systemic
design flaws, lack of training, or absence of preventive
measures. If other factors, like the ones mentioned
above, played a role in the incident, then the
responsibility would be shared among Jake and those
other factors.

Here, the response includes the systemic design flaws, lack
of training, or absence of preventive measures as factors
relevant to the causal frame, despite the fact that I made no
mention of these factors in the prompt.
More importantly, consider the many factors the LLM could
have included but did not: perhaps Jake’s mouse had a
physical glitch that caused him to click on the file, or perhaps
a hacker removed security features on that file, or any other
possible mitigating factors. A human would likely exclude
these from the causal frame unless explicitly mentioned, and
so does the LLM.
If humans are already good at establishing the causal frame,
why would we care whether the LLM can do so? Consider the
problem of root cause analysis from network logs. Suppose
the same story about Jake were rewritten in the form of
network logs, such as in the following:
Aug 22 14:02:34 User "Jake" logged in from 192.168.0.105.
Aug 22 14:03:12 Shared folder accessed by user "Jake" at //SERVER/shared-folder.
Aug 22 14:03:20 File transfer initiated by "Jake" from local: /home/jake/documents to 
remote: //SERVER/shared-folder/documents.
Aug 22 14:03:25 WARNING: Unusual network activity detected. User "Jake" launched file 
"heavy_process.exe" on //SERVER/shared-folder.
Aug 22 14:03:30 Network performance alert: Bandwidth usage spikes at 95%.
Aug 22 14:04:00 Network slowdown detected: Packet loss rate 35%.
This is harder for a human to parse than the natural
language story, even for an experienced network
administrator. Further, there would likely be many other
network events unrelated to the events of this narrative that
the human would have to read through and disregard. But
the LLM has plenty of network logs in its training data, and
extracting relevant events from a longer body of text is an
established capability of LLMs.
In most of this book, we’ve focused on using causal models
to infer objective causal truth about the world, such as
whether smoking causes lung cancer. In this example, the

objective truth, that Jake caused the network slowdown, is
trivial. The question of how responsible Jake is for the
slowdown is highly subjective. But this is still a valuable
question to answer, especially if you are trying to find a root
cause in a large network log file.
AI alignment is the task of making sure an AI system’s
behaviors are consistent with human goals and preferences.
Here, we want a specific type of AI alignment. We want the
LLM to go beyond confirming obvious causal facts to aligning
with the ways humans tend to make causal judgments. In
this case, I asked the LLM an open question about Jake’s
responsibility, and it gave a response that many humans
would agree with. I could also have instructed the LLM to
follow certain criteria when generating a judgement. For
example, an attorney could prompt the LLM to apply certain
legal theories and case law in generating a legal opinion.
Next, we’ll look at how to use the LLM to understand and
contextualize more nuanced causal concepts.
13.1.5 Understanding and contextualizing
causal concepts
It can be challenging to understand formal causal concepts
and apply them within your domain. The LLM can serve as a
tool for explaining and contextualizing these concepts. Let’s
illustrate with the counterfactual concept of necessary
causation.
You are a helpful explainer of causal inference
topics. Provide a one paragraph explanation of the
concept of necessary causation.

Certainly! Necessary causation refers to a causal
relationship where the cause is a necessary condition
for the effect to occur. In other words, without the
presence of the cause, the effect cannot happen.
However, the presence of the cause does not guarantee
the effect will occur, as there may be other conditions
that also need to be met. Think of it like a key to a lock:
the key (cause) is necessary to open the lock (effect),
but just having the key doesn’t mean the lock will open
automatically; you still need to insert and turn it. If the
lock remains locked without the key, then the key is a
necessary cause for unlocking.
A cutting-edge LLM would be trained on a wide variety of
theory and research from across domains. It can be useful to
contextualize an idea within various domains.
In one paragraph, explain how necessary
causation is conceptualized in legal theory.
In legal theory, necessary causation, often
termed “but-for causation,” is a foundational concept
used to establish a direct link between a defendant’s
actions and the harm suffered by a plaintiff. For an
action to be a but-for cause of an outcome, the
outcome would not have occurred in the absence of the
action. In other words, if one can say “but for the
defendant’s action, the harm would not have occurred,”
then necessary causation is established. However, it’s
worth noting that while but-for causation is a critical
component in many legal contexts, it’s not always

sufficient on its own to establish liability. Other factors,
such as foreseeability and proximate cause, often come
into play to determine the full scope of legal
responsibility.
From the perspective of cognitive science, explain
in one brief paragraph the role necessary causation
plays in human judgments.
From a cognitive science perspective, necessary
causation plays a pivotal role in human judgments and
decision-making. Our brains are wired to seek patterns
and causal relationships in the environment to predict
and navigate future events. When we perceive an event
as a necessary cause of another, it simplifies our
cognitive processing by creating a deterministic link
between the two events. This means that when we
encounter the cause, we can anticipate the effect,
allowing for more efficient planning and response.
However, this predisposition can also lead to cognitive
biases, where we might mistakenly attribute an effect
to a perceived necessary cause, even when other
contributing factors are at play.
From the perspective of philosophy, explain in
only one sentence how Kant and Hume differed in their
beliefs about necessary causation.
Kant believed in the existence of a priori synthetic
knowledge and that our minds impose causal order on

our experiences, while Hume argued that causation is
not a feature of the world itself but a habit of thought
based on the regular succession of events.
Now that we’ve unpacked the concept of necessary
causation, let’s apply it to a practical problem in our domain
of interest. Suppose you are a data scientist at Netflix:
Give me an example of necessary causation that
involves a Netflix user unsubscribing from Netflix.
A necessary causation for a Netflix user
unsubscribing from Netflix might be the exclusive
content that is only available on the platform. If a
particular show or movie that the user is deeply
interested in is removed from Netflix while remaining
available somewhere else, then the removal of that
content becomes a necessary cause for that user’s
decision to unsubscribe. Without the removal of that
content, the user might not have unsubscribed.
Now that the LLM has helped us understand necessary
causation, we can get its help in formalizing the concept.
13.1.6 Formalization of causal queries
For humans, natural language is the medium of our causal
reasoning. But we need to convert that natural language into
formal terms so that we can apply mathematical and
algorithmic analysis. This can be a challenge. Fortunately,
LLMs can help greatly in this respect.

For example, in chapter 8, I introduced several examples of
the language of parallel world counterfactuals and how to
convert them into counterfactual notation. Necessary
causation, more specifically the probability of necessity, was
one of these counterfactuals. Let’s put this task to the LLM in
our Netflix context:
You are a helpful causal inference assistant. I’m
considering a counterfactual inference problem in the
context of Netflix. I have the following query: “There is
a set of users who unsubscribed after content was
removed from the platform. What is the probability a
given member of this set of users would not have
unsubscribed had the content not been removed?”
Write this query as a probabilistic expression with
Pearl’s counterfactual notation.
Certainly! Pearl’s counterfactual notation offers a
concise way to express such queries.
Let’s define some variables:
1. X =removal of the content (binary, 1 if removed, 0 if not
removed).
2. Y =whether user unsubscribes (binary, 1 if user
unsubscribes, 0 if they did not unsubscribe).
Your query is essentially asking for the probability that
a user would not have subscribed, had the content not
been removed, given that it was removed and they did
unsubscribe.

Using Pearl’s counterfactual notation, this can be
written as:
Where:
Yx=0 is the counterfactual outcome for Y had X been set
to 0 (i.e., the content is not removed).
X=1 denotes that the content was removed.
Y=1 denotes that the user unsubscribed.
So, P(Yx=0 = 0| X = 1, Y = 1) is the probability that a
user would not have unsubscribed had the content not
been removed, given that it was removed and they did
unsubscribe.
The LLM can take us from conceptualization to formalization.
But beware, as it can also “hallucinate.”
13.1.7 Beware: LLMs hallucinate
We’ve seen that LLMs can aid in code generation. Let’s ask
for code that implements the probability of necessity.
Provide Python code that, for a given pair of
treatment and outcome variables, calculates the
counterfactual query “probability of necessity.”
The Probability of Necessity (PN) is the proportion
of cases where the treatment is present, and the
outcome is achieved ONLY when the treatment is

present. In simpler terms, it indicates the probability
that the outcome occurs because of the treatment.
Given that definition, you can calculate PN using the
following formula:
Where:
P(Treatment∩Outcome) is the probability of both the
treatment and outcome occurring.
P(¬Treatment∩Outcome) 
is 
the 
probability 
of 
the
outcome occurring but not the treatment.
The response goes on to provide Python code that is well
formatted, well commented, and compiles. But this answer is
wrong. This is what is commonly called a “hallucination,” a
convincing lie. This example is especially convincing—that
formula is true only when the relationship between the
treatment and outcome is monotonic, when there are no
confounders, and when P(Treatment) = P(Outcome). Those
assumptions are so strong that we can’t forgive ChatGPT for
not mentioning them. Other generations from the model
were even more off base.
We can use the LLM to augment our causal analysis,
particularly with common and expert causal knowledge as
well as generated code. But hallucination means this isn’t a
panacea. We need to rely on our own causal expertise to
spot when hallucination occurs and understand when it
threatens the quality of our analysis.
To understand why this hallucination occurred, let’s first
examine how LLMs work.

13.2 A causality-themed LLM primer
To understand how to deploy LLMs for causal applications, it
is important to understand how they work, as well as their
limitations. This section provides a quick high-level causality-
themed tour of the core ideas.
13.2.1 A probabilistic ML view of LLMs
In the context of LLMs, a “token” refers to a sequence of
characters that the model reads, which can be as short as
one character or as long as one word. Tokens are the units
into which input text is divided into manageable pieces for
the model.
Hugging Face’s Transformers library has a publicly available
version of GPT-2, which is far inferior to cutting-edge models
but has a similar Transformer architecture. The Transformer
architecture is a type of deep learning model designed to
process and understand text and other sequential data, by
focusing on the relationships between words in a sentence
regardless of their position. Let’s tokenize the expression
“Can LLMs reason counterfactually?”
Listing 13.2 Viewing example tokens that an LLM operates upon
from transformers import GPT2Tokenizer
tokenizer = GPT2Tokenizer.from_pretrained('gpt2')   #1
tokens = tokenizer.tokenize("Can LLMs reason counterfactually?")    #2
print(tokens)     #3
#1 Initialize the GPT-2 tokenizer.
#2 Tokenize the sequence.
#3 Print out the tokens.
This prints out the following tokens:
['Can', 'ĠLL', 'Ms', 'Ġreason', 'Ġcounter', 'fact', 'ually', '?']

The “Ġ” corresponds to a space. Note that punctuation
marks are tokens, and that words like “counterfactual” are
broken up into multiple tokens. Each token corresponds to an
integer indexing the token in a large “vocabulary.” GPT-2 has
a vocabulary size of 50,257.
Listing 13.3 Converting tokens to integers
input_ids = tokenizer.encode(     #1
    "Can LLMs reason counterfactually?",    #1
    return_tensors='pt'    #1
)   #1
print(input_ids)
#1 “Encode” the tokens into integers that index the token in a list of
tokens called the “vocabulary”.
This encodes the tokens into a sequence of integers:
tensor([[ 6090, 27140, 10128,  1738,  3753, 22584,   935,    30]])
The Transformer architecture works with these numeric
values.
LLMs define a joint probability distribution on sequences of
tokens. For the phrase “Can LLMs reason counterfactually?”
the model defines a probability distribution:
The models will also consider the chances that this sequence
ended at the question mark, rather than continuing. For that,
the LLM’s vocabulary includes a special token to mark the
end of a sequence. For GPT-2, this is token is <|endoftext|>:
Further, autoregressive LLMs, such as the GPT and Llama
series of Transformer models, model text in the order of the

text sequence, so they factorize this joint probability as
follows:
We can calculate each of these probabilities on the log scale
with the Transformers library. In generating the log
probability, we first calculate logits for each term in the
vocabulary. For a probability value p, the corresponding logit
is log(p / (1–p)).
Listing 13.4 Calculate the log probability of each token in the sequence
import torch
from transformers import GPT2LMHeadModel
model = GPT2LMHeadModel.from_pretrained('gpt2-medium')    #1
model.eval()    #1
input_text = "Can LLMs reason counterfactually?<|endoftext|>"     #2
input_ids = tokenizer.encode(input_text, return_tensors='pt')    #2
with torch.no_grad():    #3
    outputs = model(input_ids)    #3
    logits = outputs.logits    #3
log_probs = torch.nn.functional.log_softmax(logits, dim=-1)     #4
for idx, token in enumerate(input_ids[0]):    #4
    token_log_prob = log_probs[0][idx][token].item()    #4
    print(f"Token: {tokenizer.decode(token)}" + #4
           " | Log Probability: {token_log_prob}")     #4
#1 Initialize the GPT-2 model and set to evaluation mode.
#2 Tokenize and encode the phrase, including the end-of-sequence
token.
#3 Given the phrase, the model produces logits for every element in the
vocabulary.
#4 For each position in the sequence, get the log probability
corresponding to the token that was actually present in that position.
This prints the following output:

Token: Can | Log Probability: -10.451835632324219
Token:  LL | Log Probability: -9.275650978088379
Token: Ms | Log Probability: -14.926365852355957
Token:  reason | Log Probability: -10.416162490844727
Token:  counter | Log Probability: -8.359155654907227
Token: fact | Log Probability: -22.62082290649414
Token: ually | Log Probability: -11.302435874938965
Token: ? | Log Probability: -10.131906509399414
Token: <|endoftext|> | Log Probability: -11.475025177001953
Summing these together provides the joint probability of the
sequence under the model.
Of course, as a generative model, GPT-2 can generate the
next token conditional on the tokens that came before it. The
prompt the user provides is the beginning of the sequence,
and the model’s response extends the sequence.
Listing 13.5 Generation from the LLM
prompt = "Counterfactual reasoning would enable AI to"     #1
input_ids = tokenizer.encode(prompt, return_tensors='pt')    #1
output = model.generate(    #2
    input_ids,     #2
    max_length=25,    #2
    do_sample=True,    #2
    pad_token_id=tokenizer.eos_token_id     #2
)
generated_text = tokenizer.decode(output[0], skip_special_tokens=True)    #3
print(generated_text)   #3
#1 Specify and encode the prompt.
#2 Generate from the model. The “do_sample=True” argument means
we’re doing random selection from the probability distribution of the
next token, given all the previous tokens.
#3 Decode and print the output.
This prints out the following:
Counterfactual reasoning would enable AI to figure out what people want before they a
sk them. It would also enable self-awareness
Again, note that ChatGPT generation has a random element,
so this will likely produce something different for you.

NOTE ABOUT CONFUSING TERMINOLOGY
Models like the GPT models are often called “causal
language models,” but these are not causal models in the
way we’ve discussed in this book. They are not a causal
model of a DGP. “Causal” here refers to the autoregressive
nature of the model—the model evaluates the probability
of a token in a sequence conditional only on the tokens
that came before it.
All this is to say that the LLM is at a basic level a probability
model of the joint probability of a sequence of tokens. The
canonical training procedures for these models attempt to fit
the joint probability distribution of the tokens. Models like
GPT optimize the model’s ability to predict a given token in a
training document given the previous tokens. Understanding
that the LLM is a probability model over tokens doesn’t
explain why LLMs can generate coherent text (meaning text
with logical and consistent interrelation of ideas that forms a
comprehensible whole). For that, we need to understand
attention.
13.2.2 The attention mechanism
One of the main drivers behind the success of LLMs is use of
Transformer architectures and other neural network
architectures that rely on a mechanism called attention. The
attention mechanism allows the model to weigh the
importance of different parts of an input sequence
differently. That allows the model to learn to “focus” on
specific parts of a sequence that are more relevant to a
given task, while “ignoring” or assigning lesser weight to less
pertinent parts.

Consider, for example, the following conditional
counterfactual statement about leaves being a necessary
cause of a fire:
The Labor Day weekend wildfire started in the forest and
spread rapidly due to the dry leaves on the ground. Had
there been a controlled burn, the fire wouldn’t have
spread so rapidly.
The attention mechanism helps the model recognize that
“leaves” refers to foliage, not a departure, by weighing the
relevance of surrounding words like “ground,” “dry,” and
“forest.”
Modern LLMs have attention mechanisms stacked over many
neural network layers. This enables the LLM to attend to
concepts at different levels of granularity. For example, while
the first layer of attention focuses on immediate word-to-
word relationships, such as “leaves” with “ground,” the next
few layers connect broader phrases, treating “The Labor Day
weekend wildfire” as a single entity connected to the phrase
“spread rapidly.”
Latter layers can represent the overarching theme or subject
of the sentence and the broader text, connecting “The Labor
Day weekend wildfire” to information about how it spread.
13.2.3 From tokens to causal representation
The ability to talk about how attention enables the LLM to
learn higher-level abstractions becomes of interest to us
from the standpoint of causality. Recall figure 13.1, which
first appeared in chapter 5 (as figure 5.4).

Figure 13.1 Example from chapter 5, where digit and is-handwritten are
high-level causal drivers of low-level Xi pixels
The small squares represent pixels in an image, while the
squares digit and is-handwritten represent the digit depicted
in the image and whether it was handwritten, respectively. In
that example (section 5.1.2), I suggested that whatever
causal relations exist between individual pixels doesn’t
matter to us; we’re interested in reasoning at the level of the
objects depicted in the image.
There is a similar thing going on with tokens, as shown in
figure 13.2.

Figure 13.2 X1 through X12 are a sequence of tokens. Whatever
structure (causal or otherwise) exists between the tokens is of passing
interest. We are interested in the causal relations between concepts
described by the tokens.
In figure 13.2, as with the pixels, there is some structure at
the level of the tokens. But that structure is beside the point
—we’re interested in the causal relationships between the
concepts that form the meaning behind the tokens.
The question becomes, under what circumstances could
attention, insofar as it can learn higher-level representations,
learn a causal representation. For example, could an
attention-based model, perhaps under some set of
architectural or learning constraints, or use of interventions
in training data, learn the parallel world structure and
abstractions in the Labor Day counterfactual statement?
To consider this, we can revisit LLM hallucinations in our
question about the probability of necessity, and connect it to
causal identification.
13.2.4 Hallucination, attention, and causal
identification
The hallucination about probability of necessity was
generated with GPT-4. The same model got the Netflix
question about probability of necessity correct. Indeed, the
hallucinated answer would have been right if it merely stated

the correct identifying assumptions. I believe future versions
of GPT and similar models will likely get this question right
on the first try.
But for someone who is unfamiliar with the definition of
probability of necessity, how would they know if the model
were right or if it were hallucinating? First, the causal
hierarchy tells us that in order to be capable of generating a
right answer beyond a random guess, the query would need
to be identified with level 3 information. Perhaps that
information is provided by the user in the prompt. Perhaps
the LLM has somehow learned level 3 representations (such
a claim would require hard proof).
If the user were providing that identifying information in the
prompt, how would the user know if the model was
successfully using that information to respond to the
prompt? Suppose instead that the requirements for
identification exist and are buried in the learned
representations or data, and that they were being
successfully leveraged by the model in answering the causal
query, how could the user know for sure this was happening?
We need to engineer solutions that answer these and other
desiderata to build toward a causal AI future. In the next
section, we’ll start on this path with a simple causal LLM.
13.3 Forging your own causal LLM
In this section, we’ll sidestep the question of “can cutting-
edge LLMs reason causally?” and move on to building a
causal LLM that can reason causally. We’ll build for causality
from the ground up, rather than as an afterthought.

13.3.1 An LLM for script writing
Often our data has some implicit causal structure. When we
make that structure explicit during training, the foundation
model can learn better causal representations.
To illustrate, suppose a prolific film production studio has
historically insisted their writers use script-writing software
that required following a three-act narrative archetype,
which is common for romantic comedies: “boy meets girl,
boy loses girl, boy gets girl back.” For this archetype, they
have a corpus of many scripts. In causal terms, the events in
act 1 cause the events of act 2, and the events of acts 1 and
2 cause the events of act 3. We can draw the DAG in figure
13.3.
Figure 13.3 A causal DAG for a three-act archetype
The studio works with many such archetypes, and the
company has many scripts that follow a given archetype
template. Suppose that a set of archetypes involve a king
acting a certain way in act 1, a prince acting a certain way in
act 2, and these two actions having an effect on a kingdom
in act 3. For example, one possible archetype is “King
declares war, Prince leads army, kingdom experiences
prosperity.” But there are multiple outcomes for each act:

King in act 1: {king declares war; king negotiates peace;
king falls ill}
Prince in act 2: {prince leads army; prince abdicates
throne; prince marries foreigner}
Kingdom in act 3: {kingdom wins battle; kingdom falls
into poverty; kingdom experiences prosperity}
Figure 13.4 A causal DAG representing various King-Prince-Kingdom
archetypes
Figure 13.4 shows this space of archetypes in the form of a
causal DAG.
This describes only 3 × 3 × 3 = 27 possible archetypes, but
as you might expect, some archetypes are more common
and some are less common. We could easily model these
archetypes and the joint probability distribution by explicitly
coding causal Markov kernels in pgmpy or Pyro. But that
would only be a causal generative model on the archetypes.
If we want a script generator, we want a causal generative
model on the scripts.
To demonstrate a proof-of-concept for this idea, we’ll work
with a training dataset of short vignettes, rather than full
scripts. Let’s load and examine the training data.

Listing 13.6 Load causal narrative data
import pandas as pd
url = ("https://raw.githubusercontent.com/altdeep/"
       "causalML/master/book/chapter%2013/"
       "king-prince-kingdom-updated.csv")
df = pd.read_csv(url)
print(df.shape[0])    #1
print(df["King"][0] + "\n")     #2
print(df["King"][1] + "\n")     #2
print(df["King"][2])     #2
print("----")
print(df["Prince"][0] + "\n")     #3
print(df["Prince"][1] + "\n")     #3
print(df["Prince"][2])    #3
print("----")
print(df["Kingdom"][0] + "\n")    #4
print(df["Kingdom"][1] + "\n")     #4
print(df["Kingdom"][2])     #4
#1 The data has 21,000 stories, broken up into three short vignettes.
#2 First, the king acts.
#3 Then the prince acts.
#4 Finally, the kingdom experiences the consequences of the royals’
actions.
This code prints the following:
21000
----
King brokers a peace treaty with a rival kingdom, putting an end to years of bloody c
onflict
A wise king successfully negotiates peace with a rival nation
A wise king successfully negotiates peace between his kingdom and a long-time enemy
----
however, his son, the Prince, falls in love and marries a foreigner, causing politica
l unrest
Prince falls in love with and marries a foreign princess, forging a strong alliance
but when a new threat emerges, the Prince leads the army to defend their realm
----
despite efforts, the ongoing war results in both kingdoms falling into poverty."
the alliance strengthens their forces, leading the kingdom to a victorious battle."
however, a series of misfortunes and disastrous decisions plunge their once prosperou
s kingdom into poverty."
There are 21,000 sets of three vignettes. The preceding
output shows the first three sets in the dataset.

13.3.2 Using pretrained models for causal
Markov kernels
To train the causal Markov kernels for each node in our DAG,
we’ll take pretrained models from the Hugging Face
Transformers library, and then further train (aka “fine-tune”)
the models using our vignettes. The pretraining took care of
the heavy lifting in terms of learning to generate coherent
natural language text. The fine-tuning will align the models
toward representing our causal Markov kernels.
First, we’ll use a GPT-2 variant to model the King’s action
vignettes. As a text-completion model, it typically takes a
prompt as input, but we’ll train it to generate with an empty
prompt and produce vignettes according to the marginal
probabilities of the King’s action texts in the training data, as
in figure 13.5.
Figure 13.5 GPT-2 is fine-tuned to represent the distribution of King’s
action vignettes.
Next, we’ll use a BART model for the causal Markov kernel
Prince’s action. BART is a Transformer model released in
2019 designed specifically to take an input sequence and
generate a corresponding output sequence, such as with
translation or summarization. Large models like GPT-4 can
handle sequence-to-sequence tasks quite well, but we’ll use

a version of BART with roughly 4,000-times fewer
parameters than GPT-4, making it easier for you to load and
train on your laptop or basic Python development
environment. Given the King’s action vignette as input, it will
generate a Prince’s action vignette, as illustrated in figure
13.6.
We’ll also use a BART model to model the causal Markov
kernel for the Kingdom’s fate, as shown in figure 13.7. The
model will map the King’s and Prince’s actions to the
Kingdom’s fate.
Figure 13.6 A BART sequence-to-sequence model is fine-tuned to
represent the Prince’s action given the King’s action.
Figure 13.7 A BART sequence-to-sequence model is also used to model
the Kingdom’s fate given the King’s action and Prince’s action.

Jumping ahead, we’re interested in the conditional
probability distribution of the Kingdom’s fate, given a certain
action by the Prince. Since that will require inference of the
King’s actions given the Prince, we’ll additionally train one
more BART model that generates a King’s action vignette
given a Prince’s action vignette, as shown in figure 13.8.
Figure 13.8 A BART sequence-to-sequence model is also fine-tuned to
model the Kingdom’s fate, given the King’s and Prince’s actions.
Let’s run the training procedure. First, we’ll set up our
imports and our tokenizer. We’ll use Bart as the tokenizer for
all of our models.

Listing 13.7 Training the causal LLM
import torch
from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split
from torch.utils.data import Dataset
from transformers import (
    AutoModelForCausalLM, AutoModelForSeq2SeqLM,
    AutoTokenizer, DataCollatorForLanguageModeling,
    Seq2SeqTrainer, Seq2SeqTrainingArguments,
    Trainer, TrainingArguments)
url = ("https://raw.githubusercontent.com/altdeep/"
       "causalML/master/book/chapter%2013/"
       "king-prince-kingdom-updated.csv")
df = pd.read_csv(url)
tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained("facebook/bart-base")     #1
tokenizer.pad_token = tokenizer.eos_token    #2
def tokenize_phrases(phrases, max_length=40):  #3
    return tokenizer(
        phrases,
        truncation=True,
        padding='max_length',
        max_length=max_length
    )
#1 Set up the tokenizer.
#2 The pad token is used to make all the sequences the same length to
facilitate matrix operations. It is common to set it to the “end-of-
sequence (EOS)” token.
#3 The max length of the token is set to 40, as all of the vignettes are
less than 40 tokens.
Next we’ll create a class and a function that tokenizes the
King dataset. We’ll create a custom subclass of the PyTorch
Dataset class called ModelDataset that will store token
encodings and their corresponding labels. When accessed by
index, it returns a dictionary containing token encodings for
that index and the associated label, and it provides the total
number of examples via its __len__ method.

Listing 13.8 Tokenizing the King vignettes
class ModelDataset(Dataset):    #1
    def __init__(self, encodings, labels):   #1
        self.encodings = encodings    #1
        self.labels = labels    #1
        #1
    def __getitem__(self, idx):   #1
        item = {    #A    #1
            key: torch.tensor(val[idx])    #1
            for key, val in self.encodings.items()    #1
        }    #A   #1
        item['labels'] = torch.tensor(self.labels[idx])    #1
        return item     #1
        #1
    def __len__(self):   #1
        return len(self.encodings.input_ids)   #1
def create_king_dataset(input_phrases):     #2
    king_phrases = input_phrases.tolist()   #2
    king_encodings = tokenize_phrases(king_phrases)    #2
    king_dataset = ModelDataset(    #2
        king_encodings,   #2
        king_encodings['input_ids']) #2
    return king_dataset    #2
#1 When accessed by index, ModelDataset returns a dictionary
containing token encodings for that index and the associated label.
#2 Create a ModelDataset instance for the king vignettes.
Next we’ll tokenize the Prince and Kingdom vignettes. This
code will also produce a validation dataset used in training
sequence-to-sequence models.

Listing 13.9 Tokenizing the Prince and Kingdom vignettes
def create_seq2seq_datasets(input_phrases, target_phrases):
    input_phrases_list = input_phrases.tolist()
    target_phrases_list = target_phrases.tolist()
    spit = train_test_split(     #1
        input_phrases_list,     #1
        target_phrases_list,    #1
        test_size=0.1    #1
    )    #1
    train_inputs, val_inputs, train_targets, val_targets = spit     #1
    train_input_encodings = tokenize_phrases(train_inputs)    #2
    val_input_encodings = tokenize_phrases(val_inputs)    #2
    train_target_encodings = tokenize_phrases(train_targets)    #2
    val_target_encodings = tokenize_phrases(val_targets)     #2
    train_dataset = ModelDataset(
        train_input_encodings, train_target_encodings['input_ids']
    )
    val_dataset = ModelDataset(
        val_input_encodings, val_target_encodings['input_ids']
    )
    return train_dataset, val_dataset
#1 Split input and target phrases into training and validation sets.
#2 Encode the training and validation sets.
Next, we’ll write a training algorithm for the King model. This
function initializes a GPT-2 model with the specified
parameters, sets up the training arguments, and trains the
model on the provided dataset, finally saving the trained
model to the specified directory.

Listing 13.10 Training the King model
def train_king_model(output_dir, train_dataset,
                     model_name="gpt2-medium", epochs=4):
    king_model = AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained(model_name)     #1
    training_args_king = TrainingArguments(     #1
      output_dir=output_dir,    #1
      per_device_train_batch_size=32,     #1
      overwrite_output_dir=True,     #1
      num_train_epochs=epochs,     #1
      save_total_limit=1,    #1
      save_steps=len(train_dataset) // 16, #1
      max_grad_norm=1.0 #1
    )    #1
    data_collator = DataCollatorForLanguageModeling(    #1
        tokenizer=tokenizer,     #1
        mlm=False)    #1
    trainer_king = Trainer(     #2
        model=king_model,     #2
        args=training_args_king,     #2
        data_collator=data_collator,    #2
        train_dataset=train_dataset,     #2
    )     #2
    trainer_king.train()   #3
    king_model.save_pretrained(output_dir)
    return king_model
#1 Initialize and configure model with the specified parameters.
#2 Configure the training settings.
#3 Train the model.
Next, we’ll write a training algorithm for the sequence-to-
sequence models. The function will split the provided input
and target phrases into training and validation sets, tokenize
them, and then create and return PyTorch Dataset objects for
both sets using the ModelDataset class. The train_seq2seq_model
function initializes a sequence-to-sequence model with the
specified parameters, configures its training settings, and
then trains the model using both training and validation
datasets, finally returning the trained model.

Listing 13.11 Function for training the sequence-to-sequence models
def train_seq2seq_model(output_dir, train_dataset, val_dataset,
                        model_name="facebook/bart-base",
                        epochs=4):
    model = AutoModelForSeq2SeqLM.from_pretrained(model_name)
    training_args = Seq2SeqTrainingArguments(     #1
        output_dir=output_dir,     #1
        per_device_train_batch_size=16,     #1
        predict_with_generate=True,    #1
        logging_dir=f"{output_dir}/logs",     #1
        save_total_limit=1,    #1
        save_steps=len(train_dataset) // 16,     #1
        learning_rate=3e-5,     #1
        num_train_epochs=epochs,    #1
        warmup_steps=500,   #1
        weight_decay=0.01,     #1
    )    #1
    trainer = Seq2SeqTrainer(     #2
        model=model,    #2
        args=training_args,   #2
        train_dataset=train_dataset,     #2
        eval_dataset=val_dataset,    #2
    )     #2
    trainer.train()     #3
    model.save_pretrained(output_dir)
    return model
#1 Initialize and configure sequence-to-sequence model with the
specified parameters.
#2 Configure the training settings.
#3 Train the model using both training and validation datasets, finally
returning the trained model.
Now we’ll use this function to train the models. We’ll specify
some directories for saving checkpoints.
Note  In listing 13.14, I’ll provide code that downloads
a pretrained model from Hugging Face, so if you don’t
wish train the model, you can skip ahead to that step.

Listing 13.12 Training the King, Prince, and Kingdom models
import os
king_model_path = os.path.join(os.getcwd(), 'king_model')     #1
prince_model_path = os.path.join(os.getcwd(), 'prince_model')     #1
kingdom_model_path = os.path.join(os.getcwd(), 'kingdom_model')     #1
prince2king_model_path = os.path.join(     #1
    os.getcwd(), 'prince2king_model')     #1
king_dataset = create_king_dataset(df["King"])     #2
king_model = train_king_model(king_model_path, king_dataset)     #2
datasets = create_seq2seq_datasets(df["King"], df["Prince"])    #3
train_dataset_prince, val_dataset_prince = datasets #3
prince_model = train_seq2seq_model(    #3
    prince_model_path,     #3
    train_dataset_prince,     #3
    val_dataset_prince, #3
    epochs=6   #3
)    #3
king_and_prince = [f"{k} {p}" for k, p in zip(df["King"], df["Prince"])]     #4
df["King and Prince"] = king_and_prince    #4
train_dataset_kingdom, val_dataset_kingdom = create_seq2seq_datasets(    #4
    df["King and Prince"], df["Kingdom"]    #4
)    #4
kingdom_model = train_seq2seq_model(    #4
    kingdom_model_path,    #4
    train_dataset_kingdom,     #4
    val_dataset_kingdom,     #4
   epochs=6    #4
)  #4
#1 Provide the output directories where you want to save your model.
#2 Train the King model using Seq2Seq.
#3 Train the Prince model using Seq2Seq. The King vignettes are used
to predict the Prince vignettes.
#4 Train the Prince model using Seq2Seq. The King vignettes are used
to predict the Prince vignettes.
#5 Train the Kingdom model using Seq2Seq. The combined King and
Prince vignettes are used to predict the Kingdom vignettes.
Finally, we’ll train another model for inferring the King
vignette given a Prince vignette. We’ll use this in inference
later.

Listing 13.13 Function to train the Prince to King model
p2k_data = create_seq2seq_datasets(    
    df["Prince"], df["King"])    
train_dataset_prince2king, val_dataset_prince2king = p2k_data    
prince2king_model = train_seq2seq_model(    
    prince2king_model_path,    
    train_dataset_prince2king,    
    val_dataset_prince2king,    
    epochs=6    
)
Running the preceding training procedure will take some
time, especially if you’re not using GPU. Fortunately, there
are saved versions of the trained models in the Hugging Face
Hub. The following code pulls the Transformer models from
the Hugging Face Hub and generates from them. It also
provides a function that calculates the log probability of each
generated sequence.
Listing 13.14 Pull Transformer models from the Hugging Face Hub and
generate
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import pandas as pd
import torch
from sklearn.feature_extraction.text import TfidfVectorizer
from transformers import (
    AutoModelForCausalLM, AutoModelForSeq2SeqLM,
    AutoTokenizer, GPT2LMHeadModel,
    PreTrainedModel, BartForConditionalGeneration)
DEVICE = torch.device("cuda" if torch.cuda.is_available() else "cpu")
king_model = AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained(     #1
    "osazuwa/causalLLM-king").to(DEVICE)    #1
prince_model = AutoModelForSeq2SeqLM.from_pretrained(    #1
    "osazuwa/causalLLM-prince").to(DEVICE)    #1
kingdom_model = AutoModelForSeq2SeqLM.from_pretrained(    #1
    "osazuwa/causalLLM-kingdom").to(DEVICE)     #1
prince2king_model = AutoModelForSeq2SeqLM.from_pretrained(     #1
    "osazuwa/causalLLM-prince2king").to(DEVICE)     #1
tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained("facebook/bart-base")    #2
tokenizer.pad_token = tokenizer.eos_token  #2
#1 Load the components of our model.
#2 Load the components of our model.
#3 Load the Bart-base tokenizer and set the pad token to end-of-
sequence tokens.
Next, we’ll write some functions to encode text to tokens,
decode tokens to text, and generate text from the model

given input text.
Listing 13.15 Helper functions for encoding, decoding, and generation
def encode(text:str, device=DEVICE) -> torch.tensor:    #1
    input_ids = tokenizer.encode(text, return_tensors="pt")   #1
    input_ids = input_ids.to(device)    #1
    return input_ids   #1
def decode(text_ids: torch.tensor) -> str:    #2
    output = tokenizer.decode(text_ids, skip_special_tokens=True)     #2
    return output     #2
EMPTY_TEXT = torch.tensor(tokenizer.encode("")).unsqueeze(0).to(DEVICE)   #3
def generate_from_model(model: PreTrainedModel,     #4
                        input_sequence: torch.tensor = EMPTY_TEXT,   #4
                        max_length: int = 25,    #4
                        temperature=1.0):   #4
    output = model.generate(    #4
        input_sequence,    #4
        max_length=max_length,    #4
        do_sample=True,   #4
        pad_token_id=tokenizer.pad_token_id, #4
        eos_token_id=tokenizer.pad_token_id,   #4
        temperature=temperature,   #4
        top_p=0.9,   #4
    )   #4
    return output    #4
def convert_to_text(output):
    return decode(output[0]).strip().capitalize()
#1 Encode text into tensor.
#2 Decode tensor into text.
#3 Get the encoding for empty text, for convenience.
#4 A function for generating from models. These parameters do slightly
different things for the GPT-2 and BART models, but they more or less
overlap.
We want to use our probabilistic ML approach, so we need a
way of computing the log probabilities of generated
sequences so we can use these in inference. The following
function computes the log probability of a generated
sequence based on related values produced by the GPT-2
and BART models.

Listing 13.16 Computing log probabilities of generated sequences
def compute_log_probs(model, output_sequence):
    if isinstance(model, GPT2LMHeadModel):     #1
        outputs = model(     #1
            input_ids=output_sequence,     #1
            labels=output_sequence    #1
        )     #1
        log_softmax = torch.nn.functional.log_softmax(     #1
            outputs.logits, dim=-1)     #1
        log_probs = log_softmax.gather(2, output_sequence.unsqueeze(-1))     #1
        log_probs = log_probs.squeeze(-1).sum(dim=-1)     #1
    elif isinstance(model, BartForConditionalGeneration):
        outputs = model(    #2
            input_ids=output_sequence,    #2
            labels=output_sequence)     #2
        loss = outputs.loss  #2
        log_probs = -loss * output_sequence.size(1)    #2
    else:
        raise ValueError("Unsupported model type")
    return torch.tensor(log_probs.item())
#1 Convert logits to logprobs for GPT-2.
#2 Convert logits to logprobs from BART cross-entropy.
Finally, we’ll put these pieces together to generate a full
story from our three models.

Listing 13.17 Generating a full story
king_output = generate_from_model(king_model)   #1
king_statement = convert_to_text(king_output)   #1
print("Generated from king_nodel:", king_statement)    #1
log_prob_king = compute_log_probs(king_model, king_output)    #1
print("Log prob of generated king text:", log_prob_king)    #1
prince_output = generate_from_model(prince_model, king_output)     #2
prince_statement = convert_to_text(prince_output)   #2
print("Generated from prince_model:", prince_statement)    #2
log_prob_prince = compute_log_probs(prince_model, prince_output)    #2
print("Log prob of generated prince text:", log_prob_prince)     #2
king_prince_statement = king_statement + ". " + prince_statement     #3
king_prince_output = encode(king_prince_statement)    #3
kingdom_output = generate_from_model(kingdom_model, king_prince_output)     #3
kingdom_statement = convert_to_text(kingdom_output)    #3
print("Generated from kingdom model:", kingdom_statement)   #3
log_prob_kingdom = compute_log_probs(kingdom_model, kingdom_output)    #3
print("Log prob of generated kingdom text:", log_prob_kingdom)    #3
king_output_infer = generate_from_model(prince2king_model, prince_output)     #4
king_statement_infer = convert_to_text(king_output_infer)   #4
print("Generated statement from prince2king:", king_statement_infer)    #4
log_prob_prince2king = compute_log_probs(prince2king_model, prince_output)    #4
print("Log prob of generated inference text:", log_prob_prince2king)    #4
#1 Generate from the GPT-based model of vignettes about the King and
calculate the log probabilities of the generated sequence.
#2 Generate from the BART-based sequence-to-sequence model that
generates vignettes about the Prince given vignettes about the King,
and then calculate the log probability of the generated sequence.
#3 Generate from the BART-based sequence-to-sequence model that
generates vignettes about the Kingdom given vignettes about the King
and the Prince, and then calculate the log probability of the generated
sequence.
#4 Another BART-based sequence-to-sequence model that maps a
vignette about the Prince to a vignette about the King. We’ll use this to
infer the vignette about the King from a vignette about the Prince.
The output is nondeterministic, but one example of the
output you’ll get is as follows:

Generated statement from king_model: The king, driven by ambition, declares war on a 
neighboring nation to expand his kingdom's territories, declares war on. 
Log probability of generated king_model: tensor(-325.8379)
Generated statement from prince_model: The prince, disillusioned by his father's acti
ons, abdicates the throne in protest. 
Log probability of generated prince text: tensor(-18.2486)
Generated statement from kingdom model: As the war drags on, resources are depleted, 
and the once-prosperous kingdom falls. 
Log probability of generated kingdom text: tensor(-38.3716)
Generated statement from prince2king: A king, driven by greed, declares war on a neig
hboring kingdom. 
Log probability of generated inference text: tensor(-297.3446)
Note that the generated output isn’t perfect—for example,
the first generated statement ideally should have stopped
after “…kingdom’s territories”. We could try to train it more
or switch to a more powerful model, but this is pretty good
for a start.
Next, we’ll use these Transformers library models to define
distributions in Pyro, and then use Pyro to build a causal
generative model. First, we’ll use Pyro’s TorchDistributionMixin
to model the causal Markov kernels with the language
models. We’ll use the GPT-2 model of the King vignettes to
create the causal Markov kernel of the King variable.
Next, we’ll use the BART model to create the causal Markov
kernel for the Prince variable. The King variable causes this
variable, so the seq2seq model uses the King variable’s value
to generate a value for this model.
Finally, we’ll create the causal Markov kernel for the Kingdom
variable. The King and Prince variables are causal parents, so
we concatenate their generated outputs into one string, and
use that string to generate the Kingdom output, again using a
BART seq2seq model. We rely on a mixin called
TorchDistributionMixin, which is useful for wrapping PyTorch
distributions for use in Pyro.

Listing 13.18 Building a Torch distribution from a Transformer model
import pyro
from pyro.distributions.torch_distribution \
import TorchDistributionMixin
class TransformerModelDistribution(TorchDistributionMixin):
    def __init__(self, model: PreTrainedModel,
                 input_encoding: torch.tensor = EMPTY_TEXT,
                ):
        super().__init__()
        self.model = model
        self.input_encoding = input_encoding
    def sample(self, sample_shape=torch.Size()):     #1
        output = generate_from_model(    #1
            self.model, self.input_encoding     #1
        )    #1
        return output     #1
    def log_prob(self, value):     #2
        return compute_log_probs(self.model, value)     #2
#1 Use TorchDistributionMixin to turn a Transformers model into a Pyro
distribution. TorchDistributionMixin is used to make PyTorch
distributions compatible with Pyro’s utilities.
#2 The log_prob method returns the log probabilities used in inference
algorithms.
Now we’ll use that distribution in Pyro.

Listing 13.19 Incorporating Transformer models into a causal model with
Pyro
def causalLLM():  #1
    king = pyro.sample(     #2
        "King", TransformerModelDistribution(king_model)     #2
    )    #2
    prince = pyro.sample(     #3
        "Prince", TransformerModelDistribution(   #3
            prince_model, king)   #3
    )     #3
    king_and_prince = torch.cat([king, prince], dim=1)     #4
    kingdom = pyro.sample(    #4
        "Kingdom", TransformerModelDistribution(    #4
            kingdom_model, king_and_prince)     #4
    )    #4
    king_text = convert_to_text(king)     #5
    prince_text = convert_to_text(prince)    #5
    kingdom_text = convert_to_text(kingdom)     #5
    return king_text, prince_text, kingdom_text     #5
for _ in range(2):     #6
    king, prince, kingdom = causalLLM()    #6
    vignette = " ".join([king, prince, kingdom])     #6
    print(vignette)    #6
#1 Build the causal LLM.
#2 Create the causal Markov kernel for the King variable.
#3 Create the causal Markov kernel for the Prince variable.
#4 Create the causal Markov kernel for the Kingdom variable.
#5 Concatenate all the generated vignettes into one overall vignette
and return the result.
#6 Confirm our causal model generates the full vignette.
The preceding code generates and prints two vignettes, such
as the following:
And beloved king falls gravely ill, leaving the kingdom in despair in uncertainty ove
r the inexperienced prince to lead the kingdom. The young prince, eager to prove hims
elf, leads the army into a costly and ill-advised war. As a result, the kingdom's res
ources are depleted, plunging the once-prosperous land into.
King, fueled by ambition, declares war on a neighboring realm, leaving his subjects a
nxious and. The prince, disillusioned by his father's actions, abdicates the throne i
n search of a new life. Without strong leadership, the kingdom spirals into poverty a
nd despair.
We see that the generated texts are pretty good, though
they seem to cut off a bit early. This, and other issues with
the generations, can be addressed by tweaking the
generation parameters.

And just like that, we’ve built a causal LLM, an LLM build on a
causal DAG scaffold. Let’s prove we have a causal model by
comparing the observational and interventional distributions
entailed by the DAG.
13.3.3 Sampling from the interventional and
observational distributions
By now, you know the distribution P(Kingdom|Prince=x) will
be different from P(KingdomPrince=x), but let’s demonstrate
the fact with this causal LLM. First, we’ll model
P(Kingdom|Prince=x), where x is
His courageous Prince takes command, leading the
kingdom’s army to victory in battle after battle
To infer P(Kingdom|Prince=x), we’ll have to infer the
distribution of the latent confounder, King. We’ll do this using
the prince2king_model we trained. We’ll use a probabilistic
inference algorithm called “importance resampling.” We’ll
start by creating a proposal function (what Pyro calls a
“guide function”) that will generate samples of King and
Kingdom, given Prince.

Listing 13.20 Proposal distribution for P(Kingdom|Prince=x)
import pyro.poutine as poutine
from pyro.distributions import Categorical
PRINCE_STORY = (     #1
    "His courageous Prince takes command, leading "  #1
    "the kingdom's army to victory in battle after battle")     #1
cond_model = pyro.condition(    #1
    causalLLM, {"Prince": encode(PRINCE_STORY)})   #1
def proposal_given_prince():    #2
    prince = encode(PRINCE_STORY) #2
    king = pyro.sample(   #3
        "King",     #3
        TransformerModelDistribution(prince2king_model, prince)   #3
    )    #3
    king_and_prince = torch.cat([king, prince], dim=1)   #3
    kingdom = pyro.sample(     #4
        "Kingdom",    #4
        TransformerModelDistribution(kingdom_model, king_and_prince)    #4
    )    #4
    vignette = (convert_to_text(king) +    #5
        PRINCE_STORY +  #5
        convert_to_text(kingdom))  #5
    return vignette
#1 We condition the model on this value of the Prince variable.
#2 We’ll use a proposal function to generate from our target
distribution P(King, Kingdom|Prince=PRINCE_STORY).
#3 The proposal uses the prince2king_model to infer values of King
given Prince=PRINCE_STORY.
#4 Given the value of Prince, and the inferred value of King, use the
king_and_prince model to sample Kingdom.
#5 Concatenate the generated king tokens and provided prince tokens
to return a generated vignette so we can inspect what is sampled.
Now we’ll weigh each sample by the ratio of the probability
of the sample under the conditioned model, over the
probability of the sample under the proposal. Resampling the
samples using these weights will generate samples from the
target distribution. Pyro provides a utility for importance
sampling, but because of the varying length of the
generated sequences, it will be easier to implement
importance sampling directly.
First, we’ll write a function to process a sample and get its
importance weight.

Listing 13.21 Function to draw a sample for resampling
def process_sample(model, proposal):
    sample_trace = poutine.trace(proposal).get_trace()    #1
    king_text = convert_to_text(sample_trace.nodes['King']['value'])  #1
    kingdom_text = convert_to_text( #1
        sample_trace.nodes['Kingdom']['value'])     #1
    proposal_log_prob = sample_trace.log_prob_sum()     #2
    replay = poutine.replay(model, trace=sample_trace)    #3
    model_trace = poutine.trace(replay).get_trace()     #3
    model_log_prob = model_trace.log_prob_sum()   #3
    log_importance_weight = model_log_prob - proposal_log_prob    #4
    sample = (king_text, kingdom_text, log_importance_weight)
    return sample
#1 Extract a sample from the proposal.
#2 Calculate the total log probability of the sampled values of King and
Kingdom.
#3 Calculate the total log probability of the sample values of King and
Kingdom under the original model.
#4 Calculate the log importance weight.
Now we’ll run the importance resampling.
Listing 
13.22 
Listing 
13.22 
Importance 
resampling 
of
P(Kingdom|Prince=x)
def do_importance_resampling(model, proposal, num_samples):    #1
    original_samples = []
    for _ in range(num_samples):
        sample = process_sample(model, proposal)
        original_samples.append(sample)
    unique_samples = list(set(original_samples))     #2
    log_importance_weights = torch.tensor(   #2
        [sample[2] for sample in original_samples]) #2
    resampling_dist = Categorical(logits=log_importance_weights)     #2
    resampled_indices = resampling_dist.sample_n(num_samples)     #2
    samples = pd.DataFrame(   #2
        [unique_samples[i] for i in resampled_indices],      #2
        columns=["King", "Kingdom", "log_importance_weight"]    #2
    )     #2
    samples["Prince"] = PRINCE_STORY
    samples["Distribution"] = "observational"
    return samples[['King', 'Prince', 'Kingdom', 'Distribution']]
num_samples = 1000
posterior_samples = do_importance_resampling(
    cond_model, proposal_given_prince, num_samples)
#1 Use importance resampling as our inference procedure.
#2 Resample using the importance weights. Pass in the log weights to
the “logits” argument.
Next, we’ll infer P(KingdomPrince=x). Given our causal model
in Pyro, we can use Pyro’s do-operator to apply the

intervention. We know that given the intervention on Prince,
the edge from King to Prince is removed, so we don’t need to
use prince2king_model. We can simply do ordinary forward
generation from our intervention model.
Listing 13.23 Inferring P(KingdomPrince=x) using vanilla forward Monte
Carlo sampling
intervention_model = pyro.do(     #1
    causalLLM, {"Prince": encode(PRINCE_STORY)})   #1
intervention_samples = pd.DataFrame(     #2
    [intervention_model() for _ in range(num_samples)],     #2
    columns=["King", "Prince", "Kingdom"]    #2
)   #2
intervention_samples["Distribution"] = "interventional"     #2
all_samples = pd.concat(   #2
    [posterior_samples, intervention_samples],    #2
    ignore_index=True     #2
)    #2
#1 Forward sample from the interventional distribution.
#2 Label the samples, and combine them with the observational
samples.
Generating the samples will take some time. Since we’re
working directly with the encoded sequence tensors in Pyro,
we could leverage the potentially faster gradient-based
inference algorithm. For convenience, you can access
presaved samples in the book’s directory of the GitHub repo:
https://github.com/altdeep/causalml.
Next, let’s visualize the difference in the distributions. We
need a way to visualize sampled text from the interventional
and observational distributions. We can do so using TF-IDF
(term frequency-inverse document frequency), a numerical
statistic that reflects how important a word is to a sample
within the collection of samples, emphasizing words that are
unique to specific samples.

Listing 13.24 Get TF-IDF of generations for P(KingdomPrince=x) and
P(Kingdom|Prince=x)
import pandas as pd
import numpy as np
from sklearn.feature_extraction.text import TfidfVectorizer
kingdom_samples_url = (
    "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/altdeep/causalML/"
    "master/book/chapter%2013/kingdom_samples.csv")
all_samples = pd.read_csv(kingdom_samples_url)
observational_texts = all_samples[     #1
    all_samples["Distribution"] == "observational"]["Kingdom"]   #1
interventional_texts = all_samples[all_samples[  #1
    "Distribution"] == "interventional"]["Kingdom"]   #1
    vectorizer = TfidfVectorizer(stop_words='english')     #2
X_obs = vectorizer.fit_transform(observational_texts)    #2
X_int = vectorizer.transform(interventional_texts)     #2
k = 10     #3
feature_names = vectorizer.get_feature_names_out()     #3
obs_indices = X_obs.sum(axis=0).argsort()[0, -k:][::-1]    #3
int_indices = X_int.sum(axis=0).argsort()[0, -k:][::-1]    #3
combined_indices = np.concatenate((obs_indices, int_indices))    #3
combined_indices = np.unique(combined_indices)     #3
#1 Extract generated Kingdom vignettes from observational and
interventional distributions.
#2 Compute the TF-IDF values for generated Kingdom vignettes in each
group.
#3 Get the top k=7 words by TF-IDF for each set.
Finally, we’ll visualize the two distributions.

Listing 
13.25 
Visually 
contrast 
P(KingdomPrince=x) 
and
P(Kingdom|Prince=x)
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
labels = [feature_names[i] for i in combined_indices]    #1
labels, indices = np.unique(labels, return_index=True)     #1
obs_values = np.array(X_obs.sum(axis=0))[0, combined_indices]     #1
int_values = np.array(X_int.sum(axis=0))[0, combined_indices]     #1
obs_values = [obs_values[0][i] for i in indices]     #1
int_values = [int_values[0][i] for i in indices]     #1
combined = list(zip(labels, obs_values, int_values))    #1
sorted_combined = sorted(combined, key=lambda x: (-x[1], x[2]))    #1
labels, obs_values, int_values = zip(*sorted_combined)    #1
width = 0.35    #2
x = np.arange(len(labels))     #2
fig, ax = plt.subplots()    #2
rects1 = ax.bar(x - width/2, obs_values, width, #2
                label='Observational', alpha=0.7)    #2
rects2 = ax.bar(x + width/2, int_values, width, #2
                label='Interventional', alpha=0.7)    #2
ax.set_xlabel('Words')     #2
ax.set_ylabel('TF-IDF Values')     #2
ax.set_title(    #2
    'Top Words in Generated Kingdom Vignettes by TF-IDF Value')    #2
ax.set_xticks(x)     #2
ax.set_xticklabels(labels)    #2
ax.legend()    #2
fig.tight_layout()    #2
plt.xticks(rotation=45)   #2
plt.show()     #2
#1 Prepare data for the bar plot.
#2 Produce the plot.
This produces figure 13.9.
Figures 13.9 shows similar TF-IDF scores for words in the
observational case. This is due to the lack of variation in the
observational case, since observing the Prince constrains the
likely values of King. When we intervene on Prince, King can
vary more, leading to more variation in the results.


Figure 13.9 Visualization of the difference between samples from
P(KingdomPrince=x) and P(Kingdom|Prince=x) using TF-IDF, where x is
the Prince taking the army to battle. The observational values are flat
because of little variation in the inferred King vignettes. The
intervention enables more variation in the King vignettes and,
consequently, the Kingdom vignettes.
13.3.4 Closing thoughts
This is a toy problem with a simple DAG trained on simple
data with simple LLMs. But we could extend it to more
complicated DAGs and fine-tuning more advanced models.
There may also be other ways to combine causal
assumptions in foundation models. We’re only at the
beginning of exploring this exciting space.
Summary
Large language models (LLMs) are powerful AI models
that generate text and other modalities and achieve high
performance across a variety of benchmarks.
LLMs have proven use cases for supporting causal
analysis.
LLMs can help build a causal DAG. Moreover, they can
leverage common and expert knowledge about causal
relations and mechanisms.
The causal frame problem is the challenge of selecting
the causal variables relevant to a given problem and
excluding the irrelevant. Cutting-edge LLMs emulate how
humans set the causal frame, which is useful for
applications such as building DAGs and root cause
analysis.
LLMs can help us understand nuanced causal concepts
and how to contextualize them within our domain of
interest.
LLMs can help us put causal queries into formal terms.

LLMs 
are 
prone 
to 
hallucinations—convincing 
yet
incorrect responses to our queries.
At their core, LLMs are probabilistic machine learning
models that model a joint probability distribution on
sequences of tokens.
The attention mechanism enables the LLM to learn
higher-level representations that make cutting-edge
LLMs so powerful.
Just because an LLM learns a higher-level representation
doesn’t mean it learns a causal representation. Even if
that did work in some special cases, it would be hard for
the user to verify that it is working.
We can build our own causal LLM by composing fine-
tuned LLMs over a causal DAG scaffold. This allows us to
work with cutting-edge LLMs while admitting causal
operations, such as a do-operator.
Use the causal hierarchy theory as your North Star in
your exploration of how to combine causality with LLMs
and multimodal models, as well as exploring how well
these models can learn causal representations on their
own.
[1] C. Glymour, “Android epistemology and the frame
problem,” in Z.W. Pylyshyn, ed., The robot’s dilemma: The
frame problem in artificial intelligence (Praeger, 1987), pp.
63–75.

index
SYMBOLS
<$nopage>SCMs (structural causal models).
<Emphasis>See<Default Para Font> structural causal
models (SCMs)
<$nopage>independence and conditional independence.
<Emphasis> See<Default Para Font> conditional
independence
<$nopage>decision theory
causal decision theory. <Emphasis>See <Default Para
Font>causal decision theory
<$nopage>encoder in VAE (variational autoencoder).
<Emphasis> See <Default Para Font>VAE (variational
autoencoder)
<$nopage>graphical models.<Emphasis> See<Default
Para Font> DAGs and causal graphical models
<$nopage>causal DAGs (directed acyclic graphs).
<Emphasis>See <Default Para Font>DAGs and causal
graphical models
<$nopage>decoder in VAE (variational autoencoder).
<Emphasis> See <Default Para Font>VAE (variational
autoencoder)
A

AI alignment
assignment functions in structural causal models, 2nd, 3rd
AffineTransformation
attention mechanism
amortized inference
approximate Bayesian computation
abductive inference
ATEs (average treatment effects), 2nd, 3rd
attribution and credit assignment
Binary counterfactuals and uplift modeling, 2nd
Probabilities of causation and attribution
ANOVA (analysis of variance)
B
belief propagation
backdoor adjustment estimand
demystifying, 2nd
estimand object in DoWhy
formula
BaseFactor class

backdoor adjustment estimation
confidence intervals for machine learning methods
double machine learning
estimation with machine learning
linear regression estimation of, 2nd, 3rd
meta learners
propensity score estimators of
propensity score matching
propensity score stratification
propensity score weighting
Bernoulli distribution, reparameterization trick for, 2nd
but-for causation
BayesianNetwork class in pgmpy, 2nd, 3rd, 4th
Bayesian causal generative inference, identifiability of
Bayesianism
Causal modelers and Bayesians
Bayes rules (decision theory)
Bayesian estimation
Bayesian estimation with deep causal graphical latent
variable model

posterior predictive inference of ATE
Bellman equation
C
credible intervals
Categorical object
c-component factorization, 2nd
credit assignment and attribution
Binary counterfactuals and uplift modeling
causal Markov property
Markov decision processes, relationship to
d-separation, relationship to
causal decision theory, 2nd
admissibility of Bayes rules
causal characterization of decision rules and policies
maximizing expected utility
causal sufficiency, 2nd
causal Markov kernels, 2nd
using pretrained models for
causal reasoning

CGMs (causal generative models)
CPD (conditional probability distribution)
causal representation learning, 2nd
causal effects
relative risk and odds ratios as causal effects
colliders, 2nd, 3rd
counterfactual image generation, assumptions needed for
causal inductive bias
chi_square function, 2nd
counterfactual regret
conditioning
counterfactual inference algorithm
counterfactual image generation with deep generative
model
counterfactual variational inference, 2nd
dSprites data
walkthrough
conditional hypothetical statement, 2nd
consistency rule, 2nd
CausalModel module

causal data science
causal discovery
Confounders2Engagement network
causal constraints
testing DAGs with
churn rate (marketing, subscription services)
Netflix recommendation algorithms and counterfactual
graphs, 2nd
uplift modeling
confounders, 2nd
conditional probability table
causal inference workflow
extending inference to estimation
selecting query
causal hierarchy, 2nd
causal hierarchy theorem
where questions and queries fall on, 2nd
categorical variables
counterfactual reasoning
for decision-theory, 2nd

counterfactual identification, general
problem with general algorithm for counterfactual
inference
causal abstraction, 2nd
counterfactual statements
causal AI, 2nd
approach to causal inference, 2nd
causality’s role in modern AI workflows
key areas in
key definitions
causal reinforcement learning
Customization Level
causal graphical models
case study
inference with trained causal probabilistic machine
learning model
CATEs (conditional average treatment effects), 2nd
CausalModel class, 2nd, 3rd
counterfactuals
binary counterfactuals
motivating reasoning, 2nd

symbolic representation of, 2nd
causal machine learning
counterfactual inference on causal image model, 2nd
deep causal graphical model of MNIST and TMNIST
training an SCM as a normalizing flow model
training an SCM with automatic differentiation in PyTorch
causal invariance
independence of mechanism and
conditional independence, 2nd, 3rd
caveats with testing
colliders
conditional independence testing, 2nd
d-separation and
linking causality to
causal queries
change-of-variable formula
counterfactual graphs, 2nd
causal learning
causal inference, 2nd
posterior predictive inference of ATE

with causal generative models
D
Dataset class
DataLoader class
Dirichlet conjugate prior
do-calculus
demystifying, 2nd
rules of
using for backdoor identification
DataFrame object, 2nd
diffusion models, 2nd
delayed feedback
deterministic abduction
do-notation
data science
causal inference and
differential diagnosis
data_model
d-connection

deep learning, 2nd
VAE (variational autoencoder)
causal inference to enhance, 2nd
causal interpretation
causal model of computer vision problem
DAGs (directed acyclic graphs) and causal graphical
models:scaffolding for causal generative models:training an
SCM:with automatic differentiation in PyTorch
DoWhy, 2nd, 3rd
DAGs (directed acyclic graphs) and causal graphical
models:scaffolding for causal generative models:training an
SCM:as a normalizing flow model
DiscreteFactor class, 2nd
decision theory, 2nd
DGP (data generating process), 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th
decision rules and policies, causal characterization of
other types of decision rules
d-separation, 2nd
DAG class
DiscreteFactor object
DAGs (directed acyclic graphs) and causal graphical models,
2nd

MDPs as
SCMs and
causal DAGs and representation of time
causal discovery, 2nd, 3rd
communicating and visualizing causal assumptions
computing over
failure to illustrate mechanism
generating code for, 2nd
including variables in causal DAGs by role in inference,
2nd
learning causal DAGs from data (causal discovery), 2nd,
3rd
linking causality to conditional independence
representing causal assumptions, 2nd
scaffolding for causal generative models, 2nd, 3rd, 4th,
5th, 6th, 7th, 8th
scope of, 2nd
selecting variables for inclusion in
testing and refuting
data
at levels 1, 2, and 3 of the causal hierarchy

data drift
do function, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th
decomposable models
do subroutine
do method, 2nd
E
exogenous variable distribution
empirical joint distribution
ETT (effect of treatment on the treated)
effect size
exogenous distributions
ELBO (evidence lower bound on the log-likelihood of the
data)
estimators
comparing and selecting estimators
front-door estimation
instrumental variable estimation
endogenous variables, 2nd
estimand
estimands

backdoor adjustment estimand
do-calculus, identification with
estimand object in DoWhy
front-door adjustment estimand
identifying estimands
instrumental variable estimand
effect modifiers
exogenous variables, 2nd, 3rd
F
forward_sample method
femur length and height
fit method
flow dependence
functional constrainsts/Verma constraints
verma.constraints function
foundation models
front-door estimation
with deep Bayesian causal graphical model
factual conditions

fairness
causal AI and, 2nd
G
GLM (generalized linear model)
graphical identification algorithms
ETT (effect of treatment on the treated), identification of
front-door estimand, identification of, 2nd
get_random_example function
graph surgery
guide function, 2nd
GANs (generative adversarial networks)
global Markov property
Graphviz and PyGraphviz
get_independencies function, 2nd
H
histograms
hypothetical statement, 2nd
heterogeneous treatment effects
hypothetical language

heterogeneity
hypothetical conditions
I
identification
causal inference workflow, 2nd
defining
graphical counterfactual identification, 2nd
graphical identification with do-calculus, 2nd
probabilistic inference, 2nd
separating from estimation
with backdoor adjustment
interventional queries, 2nd
identify_effect method, 2nd
interventions
case studies of, 2nd
causal DAGs, ideal interventions, 2nd
causal Markov kernels, ideal interventions
causal effects, 2nd
causal programs, ideal interventions

credit fraud detection case study
from experiments to
from observations to experiments
from randomized experiments to
ideal interventions
intervention variables and distributions, 2nd
practical considerations in modeling, 2nd
ideal interventions
interventional distributions
inductive biases, 2nd, 3rd
identified_estimand object
ignorability
IdentifiedEstimand class
identity function
inference
with trained causal probabilistic machine learning model
intervention operators
do method in pgmpy’s DAG class
graph surgery, 2nd, 3rd
node-splitting

pyro.do operator, 2nd, 3rd, 4th
independence of mechanism
as inductive bias, 2nd
causal and anti-causal learning, 2nd
example with semi-supervised learning
parameter modularity and
instrumental variables (IVs), 2nd
estimation, 2nd
using LLMs to propose IVs
L
LassoCV
logits
LinearGaussianCPD
LLMs (large language models), 2nd, 3rd
attention mechanism
causal LLMs
causal knowledgebase, 2nd
causality-themed LLM primer
hallucination, attention, and causal identification

probabilistic ML view of, 2nd
tokens to causal representation
location parameters
Laplace, Pierre-Simon
log_prob method
latent variables
latent variables and identification
learning parameters when there are
local Markov property, 2nd
latent exogenous variables
M
ModelDataset class, 2nd
models
causal hierarchy and
MDPs (Markov decision processes)
actions in
MNIST (Modified National Institute of Standards and
Technology) database, causal AI and
model method
Markov property

Monty Hall problem, 2nd, 3rd
building parallel world graphical model
causal DAG for
running counterfactual inference algorithm, 2nd
specifying assignment functions for endogenous variables,
2nd
specifying exogenous variables
monotonicity, 2nd, 3rd
minimax decision rules
MCMC (Markov chain Monte Carlo)
mass action kinetics
ML (machine learning)
causal AI and
counterfactual analysis of models, 2nd
decomposable models
explainable models
lack of identification and misguided
Markov factorization property
monty_hall_model
model building, 2nd

N
null hypothesis
normalizing flows
necessary causation
PN (Probability of Necessity), 2nd
neural causal model, training
negative regret
neural splines
Newcomb’s paradox, 2nd
O
overfitting
OR (odds ratios)
online gaming
P
parameter modularity, 2nd
causal transfer learning, data fusion, and invariant
prediction
fitting parameters with common sense
independence of mechanism and
PDAGs (partially directed acyclic graphs)

Predictive class
pyro.condition function
probability mass
pyro.sample function
PyGraphviz
program induction
probabilities of causation, 2nd
attribution
probability of disablement and enablement
probability of necessity, 2nd
probability of necessity and sufficiency
probability of sufficiency
probabilistic inference algorithms
proximal causality
params dictionary
pyro.sample call, 2nd
probabilistic generative modeling
computational probability
from empirical joint distribution to observational joint
distribution

from full joint distribution to data generating process
from observed data to data generating process
from observed data to empirical joint distribution
from observed joint distribution to full joint distribution
many-to-one relationships down hierarchy
parallel world
probabilistic programming
Parade magazine
Pyro library
pyro.condition function
pyro.do operator, 2nd, 3rd, 4th
pyro.render_model() function
pyro.sample function, 2nd
permutation test
probability of necessity, 2nd
probabilistic inference
interventional and counterfactual inference with MCMC
programming
prediction, inferring hypothetical outcomes
parallel world graphs, 2nd

applying hypothetical condition via graph surgery
overview of, 2nd
potential outcomes in possible worlds
reasoning across more than two possible worlds, 2nd
rule of thumb
PseudoDelta function
parametric assumptions
probabilities
conditional independence and causality
independence
posterior predictive check
prince2king_model
plate models, 2nd
overview of
working at right level of abstraction
pyro.render_model() function
populations, probability distributions as models for
generalizing to abstract populations
pyro.do operator, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th, 6th
PurchasesNetwork network

POMDPs (partially observable MDPs)
pgmpy
learning latent variables with
parameter learning
Bayesian estimation, 2nd
automatic differentiation and deep learning, 2nd, 3rd, 4th,
5th
maximum likelihood estimation
other techniques for parameter estimation
partial identification
probability distributions
PN (Probability of Necessity)
propensity score
propensity score matching
propensity score stratification
propensity score weighting
policies
as stochastic interventions, 2nd
physical (frequentist) probability
p-value

Popper, Karl
Q
query object
R
rate parameters
RL (reinforcement learning), 2nd, 3rd, 4th
MDPs as causal DAGs
causal Bellman equation
causal probabilistic decision-modeling and admissibility
causality and MDPs
deceptive alignment of argmax values of causal and non-
causal expectations
decisions as level 2 queries
partially observable MDPs
policy in MDPs
rd_variable_name argument
render function in pyro
random processes, 2nd
rewards
in MDPs (Markov decision processes)

robust models
machine learning, 2nd
reconstruct_img helper function
reparameterization
tricks leading to different SCMs, 2nd
reinforcement learning
introspection in causal decision theory
random variables
random seed
random generation
regularization
regression discontinuity
regret
refutation, 2nd
adding dummy confounder
data size reduction
replacing outcome with dummy outcome
replacing treatment with dummy
rule-based systems, exogenous variables in

S
stochastic interventions, 2nd
intervention policies
policies as
random assignment in experiments, 2nd
sampling
from interventional and observational distributions
subjective probability
determinism
overview
statistical tests for independence
statistical model
sampling p-values
sequential decisions, 2nd
bandit feedback
causal queries on sequential model
contextual bandit feedback
delayed feedback
SVI (stochastic variational inference), 2nd

setting up posterior inference with
stochastic processes
structural causal models (SCMs), 2nd
Monty Hall problem
applications of SCM-modeling of rule-based systems
combining with deep learning
equivalence between
from CGMs to, 2nd
ideal interventions
implementing Monty Hall as SCM with pgmpy
implementing for rule-based systems
training on data, 2nd
Softplus activation function
semantic image editing with counterfactuals
semi-supervised learning, 2nd
states, in MDPs
simulation, 2nd
avoiding confusion between factual and hypothetical
conditions
imagination, conditions, and interventions

subpopulations
SWIGs (single-world intervention graphs)
counterfactual graphs vs.
counterfactual identification with
counterfactual inference in Pyro, 2nd
identification with
single-world assumption
supervised learning
statistics
causal AI and
statistical estimation of model parameters
Bayesian estimation, 2nd
automatic differentiation and deep learning, 2nd, 3rd
goodness-of-fit vs. cross-validation
maximizing likelihood
minimizing other loss functions and regularization
statistical and computational attributes of an estimator
script writing
softmax rules
sequential decision-making, examples in

streaming wars
sample method, 2nd, 3rd
T
training loss
twin-world graph
TwinWorldCounterfactual handler
training models
testing DAGs (directed acyclic graphs):refuting DAGs given
latent variables:testing functional constraints:setting up
environment
time_select function
training data, setting up
testing DAGs (directed acyclic graphs)
causal constraints
causal discovery
d-separation
refuting DAGs given latent variables, 2nd
training_guide
transformations
graph surgery

multi-world transformation
node-splitting
to counterfactual graph
training
SCMs (structural causal models) with basic PyTorch
SCMs with neural SCMs and normalizing flows, 2nd
SCMs with probabilistic PyTorch
TabularCPD, 2nd, 3rd
training procedure
Thompson sampling
Typeface MNIST (TMNIST)
topic models
time, causal DAGs can represent
TF-IDF (term frequency-inverse document frequency)
transition function
causal Markov kernel and
in MDPs
true_dgp function, 2nd
TorchDistributionMixin

U
universal function approximator
utility
maximizing expected
representing as a variable and node in the DAG
uncertainty
unmodeled confounders
uplift modeling, 2nd
segmenting users into persuadables, sure things, lost
causes, and sleeping dogs
using counterfactuals for segmentation
underspecification
V
variable elimination inference algorithm
VariableElimination class in pgmpy, 2nd
valid backdoor adjustment sets
variables
including in DAGs by role in inference, 2nd
selecting for inclusion in DAGs, 2nd
variational distribution, 2nd

variational inference, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th
variational autoencoder (VAE)
counterfactual inference of causal image model
deep causal graphical latent variable model
deep causal graphical model of MNIST and TMNIST, 2nd,
3rd
variable_card argument
VAE (variational autoencoder), 2nd, 3rd
VAE inspired model for causal inference
deep causal graphical model of MNIST and TMNIST
W
WHERE clause
workflow:causal inference:identifying estimand:choosing
estimands and reducing DAG anxiety
workflow:causal inference:identifying estimand:backdoor
adjustment estimand
workflow:causal inference:identifying estimand:lacking
identification
workflow:causal inference:estimating estimand:comparing
and selecting estimators
workflow:causal inference:identifying estimand:front-door
adjustment estimand

workflow:causal inference:estimating estimand:backdoor
estimation with machine learning
weight parameters
workflow:causal inference:identifying estimand:instrumental
variable estimand
workflow:causal inference:estimating estimand:linear
regression estimation of backdoor estimand, 2nd
workflow:causal inference:estimating estimand:propensity
score estimators of backdoor estimand, 2nd
workflow:causal inference:estimating estimand:front-door
estimation
workflow:causal inference:estimating estimand:instrumental
variable methods
Z
Z-test
