Predicting Numbers:
An AI Approach to Solving Number Series
Marco Ragni and Andreas Klein
Center for Cognitive Science,
Friedrichstr. 50, 79098 Freiburg, Germany
{ragni,klein}@cognition.uni-freiburg.de
Abstract. Solving number series poses a challenging problem for hu-
mans and Artiﬁcial Intelligence Systems. The task is to correctly predict
the next number in a given series, in accordance with a pattern inher-
ent to that series. We propose a novel method based on Artiﬁcial Neural
Networks with a dynamic learning approach to solve number series prob-
lems. Our method is evaluated on an own experiment and over 50.000
number series from the Online Encyclopedia of Integer Sequences (OEIS)
database.
1
Introduction
Identifying the pattern in a number series can pose serious problems for human
and artiﬁcial reasoning systems. Take, for example:
(i) 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, . . .
(ii) 2, 5, 9, 19, 37, 75, 149, 299, . . .
The ﬁrst problem is easy to solve and requires only the addition of 2, while
the second problem requires the application of the function an := 2an−1 +
(−1)n on a1 := 2 and is, as we will see, diﬃcult for humans and for ANNs.
Number series problems are interesting for Artiﬁcial Intelligence as principally
any computable function can be hidden and the set of operators is not necessarily
restricted to +, −, ×. Number series problems are used in intelligence tests for
determining mathematical pattern-recognition capabilitiess. Especially the latter
aspect identifying patterns is an important aspect of any intelligent system, and
can provide a fruitful benchmark for general approaches. There is an Online
Encyclopedia of Integer Sequences [1,9] (OEIS) and a journal dedicated to the
study of integer sequences [2].
In the following, we propose a method using artiﬁcial neural networks (ANNs)
and a novel dynamic approach to solve number series problems. We compare
our approach with human performance in solving number series problems and
use the OEIS database for benchmarking. Finally, we discuss the results and
performance and provide a short outlook of our further work.
J. Bach and S. Edelkamp (Eds.): KI 2011, LNAI 7006, pp. 255–259, 2011.
c
⃝Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2011

256
M. Ragni and A. Klein
Table 1. Pattern generation example for an ANN using the dynamic approach with
three input nodes and a number series of seven given numbers (n1, ..., n7) with the n8–
th to predict. Four patterns (p1, ..., p4) are used for training, each with three training
values (vi, vi+1, vi+2) and one target value t = ni+3. One pattern (p5) is used for testing
the ANN without a target value.
Pattern n1 n2 n3 n4 n5 n6 n7 n8
p1
v1 v2 v3 t
p2
v2 v3 v4 t
p3
v3 v4 v5 t
p4
v4 v5 v6 t
p5
v5 v6 v7 ?
2
Using a Dynamic Learning Approach
For our attempt to solve number series with artiﬁcial neural networks [3], we
use three–layered networks with error back-propagation and hyperbolic tangent
as activation. We used fi =
n
10len(n) as input function for the network and the
inverse, fo = f −1
i
, as output function of the network. The weights were initially
randomly assigned with values between zero and one. A momentum factor of 0.1
was used.
For data analysis, we systematically varied the learning rate, the number of
input nodes, the number of hidden nodes and the number of training iterations.
These variations should allow for a comparison of the diﬀerent ANNs with em-
pirical results. For all conﬁgurations only one output node was used.
To generate patterns for training and testing a network, we built patterns as
tuples of training values and one target value. The number of training values
of a pattern is equivalent to the number of input nodes m of the network used.
Starting with the ﬁrst number, a subsequence of training values was shifted
through the number series. As corresponding target value, the next number of
the subsequence was used (cf. Table 1).
Since the last given value of the number series with length n remains as target
value and we need at least one training and one test pattern, the maximum
length of a subsequence of training values for a pattern is n −2. Hence, for a
network conﬁguration with m input nodes exactly n−m patterns were generated.
Consequently, the ﬁrst (n −m) −1 patterns were used for training, while the
last one remained for testing and thus predicting the last given number of the
sequence. Therefore, the last given number of the number series - the main target
value - was never used for training.
The training of the network was iterated on the patterns for a various number
of times. After training the network we tested the learning result with the last
pattern without a given target value and compared the prediction with the actual
value.
